And if physical and biological science wilted and died on the stony soil
of Roman prosperity, political and social science never had a chance to
germinate. Political discussion would have been treason to the emperor,
social or economic inquiry would have threatened the rich. So Rome,
until disaster fell upon her, never examined into her own social health,
never questioned the ultimate value of her hard officialism.
Consequently, there was no one who realized the gravity of her failure
to develop any intellectual imagination to hold her empire together, any
general education in common ideas that would make men fight and work for
the empire as men will fight and work for a dear possession. But the
rulers of the Roman Empire did not want their citizens to fight for
anything in any spirit at all. The rich had eaten the heart out of their
general population, and they were content with the meal they had made.
The legions were filled with Germans, Britons, Numidians, and the like;
and until the very end the wealthy Romans thought they could go on
buying barbarians to defend them against the enemy without and the rebel
poor within. How little was done in education by the Romans is shown by
an account of what was done. Says Mr. H. Stuart Jones,[258] “Julius
Cæsar bestowed Roman citizenship on ‘teachers of the liberal arts’;
Vespasian endowed professorships of Greek and Latin oratory at Rome; and
later emperors, especially Antoninus Pius, extended the same benefits to
the provinces. Local enterprise and munificence were also devoted to the
cause of education; we learn from the correspondence of the younger
Pliny that public schools were founded in the towns of Northern Italy.
But though there was a wide diffusion of knowledge under the empire,
there was no true intellectual progress. Augustus, it is true, gathered
about him;the most brilliant writers of his time, and the début of the
new monarchy coincided with the Golden Age of Roman literature; but this
was of brief duration, and the beginnings of the Christian era saw the
triumph of classicism and the first steps in the decline which awaits
all literary movements which look to the past rather than the future.”