This was the natural and proper end of Napoleon’s career. So this raid
of an intolerable egotist across the disordered beginnings of a new time
should have closed. At last he was suppressed. And had there been any
real wisdom in the conduct of human affairs, we should now have to tell
of the concentration of human science and will upon the task his
treachery and vanity had interrupted, the task of building up a world
system of justice and free effort in the place of the bankrupt ancient
order. But we have to tell of nothing of the sort. Science and wisdom
were conspicuously absent from the great council of the allies. Came the
vague humanitarianism and dreamy vanity of the Tsar Alexander, came the
shaken Habsburgs of Austria, the resentful Hohenzollerns of Prussia, the
aristocratic traditions of Britain, still badly frightened by the
revolution and its conscience all awry with stolen commons and sweated
factory children. No peoples came to the Congress, but only monarchs and
foreign ministers; and though you bray a foreign office in the bloodiest
of war mortars, yet will its diplomatic habits not depart from it. The
Congress had hardly assembled before the diplomatists set to work making
secret bargains and treaties behind each other’s backs. Nothing could
exceed the pompous triviality of the Congress which gathered at Vienna
after a magnificent ceremonial visit of the allied sovereigns to London.
The social side of the congress was very strong, pretty ladies abounded,
there was a galaxy of stars and uniforms, endless dinners and balls, a
mighty flow of bright anecdotes and sparkling wit. Whether the two
million dead men upon the battle-fields laughed at the jokes, admired
the assemblies, and marvelled at the diplomatists is beyond our
knowledge. It is to be hoped their poor wraiths got something out of the
display. The brightest spirit of the gathering was a certain Talleyrand,
one of Napoleon’s princes, a very brilliant man indeed, who had been a
pre-revolutionary cleric, who had proposed the revolutionary
confiscation of the church estates, and who was now for bringing back
the Bourbons.