The Central Government of the United States was at first a very feeble
body, a congress of representatives of the thirteen governments, held
together by certain Articles of Confederation. This Congress was little
more than a conference of sovereign representatives; it had no control,
for instance, over the foreign trade of each state, it could not coin
money nor levy taxes by its own authority. When John Adams, the first
minister from the United States to England, went to discuss a commercial
treaty with the British foreign secretary, he was met by a request for
thirteen representatives, one from each of the states concerned. He had
to confess his inadequacy to make binding arrangements. The British
presently began dealing with each state separately over the head of
Congress, and they retained possession of a number of posts in the
American territory about the great lakes because of the inability of
Congress to hold these regions effectually. In another urgent matter
Congress proved equally feeble. To the west of the thirteen states
stretched limitless lands into which settlers were now pushing in
ever-increasing numbers. Each of the states had indefinable claims to
expansion westward. It was evident to every clear-sighted man that the
jostling of these claims must lead in the long run to war, unless the
Central Government could take on their apportionment. The feebleness of
the Central Government, its lack of concentration, became so much of an
inconvenience and so manifest a danger that there was some secret
discussion of a monarchy, and Nathaniel Gorham of Massachusetts, the
president of Congress, caused Prince Henry of Prussia, the brother of
Frederick the Great, to be approached on the subject. Finally a
constitutional convention was called in 1787 at Philadelphia, and there
it was that the present constitution of the United States was in its
broad lines hammered out. A great change of spirit had gone on during
the intervening years, a widespread realization of the need of unity.