The primitive civilizations were, we may say, “communities of
obedience”; obedience to god-kings or kings under gods was their cement;
the nomadic tendency on the other hand has always been towards a
different type of association which we shall here call a “community of
will.” In a wandering, fighting community the individual must be at once
self-reliant and disciplined. The chiefs of such communities must be
chiefs who are followed, not masters who compel. This community of will
is traceable throughout the entire history of mankind; everywhere we
find the original disposition of all the nomads alike, Nordic, Semitic,
or Mongolian, was individually more _willing_ and more _erect_ than
that of the settled folk. The Nordic peoples came into Italy and Greece
under leader kings; they did not bring any systematic temple cults with
them, they found such things in the conquered lands and adapted as they
adopted them. The Greeks and Latins lapsed very easily again into
republics, and so did the Aryans in India. There was a tradition of
election also in the early Frankish and German kingdoms.[372] The early
Caliphs were elected, the Judges of Israel and the “kings” of Carthage
and Tyre were elected, and so was the Great Khan of the Mongols until
Kublai became a Chinese monarch.... Equally constant in the settled
lands do we find the opposite idea, the idea of a non-elective divinity
in kings and of their natural and inherent right to rule.... As our
history has developed we have noted the appearance of new and
complicating elements in the story of human societies; we have seen that
nomad turned go-between, the trader, appear, and we have noted the
growing importance of shipping in the world. It seems as inevitable that
voyaging should make men free in their minds as that settlement within a
narrow horizon should make men timid and servile.... But in spite of all
such complications, the broad antagonism between the method of obedience
and the method of will runs through history down into our own times. To
this day their reconciliation is incomplete.