There will be little drudgery in this better-ordered world. Natural
power harnessed in machines will be the general drudge. What drudgery is
inevitable will be done as a service and duty for a few years or months
out of each life; it will not consume nor degrade the whole life of
anyone. And not only drudges, but many other sorts of men and ways of
living which loom large in the current social scheme will necessarily
have dwindled in importance or passed away altogether. There will be few
professional fighting men or none at all, no custom-house officers; the
increased multitude of teachers will have abolished large police forces
and large jail staffs, mad-houses will be rare or non-existent; a
worldwide sanitation will have diminished the proportion of hospitals,
nurses, sick-room attendants, and the like; a world-wide economic
justice, the floating population of cheats, sharpers, gamblers,
forestallers, parasites, and speculators generally. But there will be no
diminution of adventure or romance in this world of the days to come.
Sea fisheries and the incessant insurrection of the sea, for example,
will call for their own stalwart types of men; the high air will clamour
for manhood, the deep and dangerous secret places of nature. Men will
turn again with renewed interest to the animal world. In these
disordered days a stupid, uncontrollable massacre of animal species goes
on--from certain angles of vision it is a thing almost more tragic than
human miseries; in the nineteenth century dozens of animal species, and
some of them very interesting species, were exterminated; but one of the
first fruits of an effective world state would be the better protection
of what are now wild beasts. It is a strange thing in human history to
note how little has been done since the Bronze Age in taming, using,
befriending, and appreciating the animal life about us. But that mere
witless killing which is called sport to-day, would inevitably give
place in a better educated world community to a modification of the
primitive instincts that find expression in this way, changing them into
an interest not in the deaths, but in the lives of beasts, and leading
to fresh and perhaps very strange and beautiful attempts to befriend
these pathetic, kindred lower creatures we no longer fear as enemies,
hate as rivals, or need as slaves. And a world state and universal
justice does not mean the imprisonment of our race in any bleak
institutional orderliness. There will still be mountains and the sea,
there will be jungles and great forests, cared for indeed and treasured
and protected; the great plains will still spread before us and the wild
winds blow. But men will not hate so much, fear so much, nor cheat so
desperately--and they will keep their minds and bodies cleaner.