Is it any wonder that with the growth of the Roman state and the
complication of its business, power shifted back from such a Popular
Assembly to the Senate, which was a comparatively compact body varying
between three hundred as a minimum, and, at the utmost, nine hundred
members (to which it was raised by Cæsar), men who had to do with
affairs and big business, who knew each other more or less, and had a
tradition of government and policy? The power of nominating and calling
up the senators vested in the Republic first with the consuls, and when,
some time after, “censors” were created, and many of the powers of the
consuls had been transferred to them, they were also given this power.
Appius Claudius, one of the first of the censors to exercise it,
enrolled freedmen in the tribes and called sons of freedmen to the
Senate. But this was a shocking arrangement to the conservative
instincts of the time; the consuls would not recognize his Senate, and
the next censors (304 B.C.) set aside his invitations. His attempt,
however, serves to show how far the Senate had progressed from its
original condition as a purely patrician body. Like the contemporary
British House of Lords, it had become a gathering of big business men,
energetic politicians, successful adventurers, great landowners, and the
like; its patrician dignity was a picturesque sham; but, unlike the
British House of Lords, it was unchecked legally by anything but the
inefficient Popular Assembly we have already described, and by the
tribunes elected by the plebeian assembly. Its legal control over the
consuls and proconsuls was not great; it had little executive power; but
in its prestige and experience lay its strength and influence. The
interests of its members were naturally antagonistic to the interests of
the general body of citizens, but for some generations that great mass
of ordinary men was impotent to express its dissent from the proceedings
of this oligarchy. Direct popular government of a state larger than a
city state had already failed therefore in Italy, because as yet there
was no public education, no press, and no representative system; it had
failed through these mere mechanical difficulties, before the first
Punic War. But its appearance is of enormous interest, as the first
appearance of a set of problems with which the whole political
intelligence of the world wrestles at the present time.