Now here was a change-over of quite primary importance in human affairs.
The chief solicitude of the rich and of the ruler in the old
civilization had been to keep up a supply of drudges. As the nineteenth
century went on, it became more and more plain to the intelligent
directive people that the common man had now to be something better than
a drudge. He had to be educated--if only to secure “industrial
efficiency.” He had to understand what he was about. From the days of
the first Christian propaganda, popular education had been smouldering
in Europe, just as it has smouldered in Asia wherever Islam has set its
foot, because of the necessity of making the believer understand a
little of the belief by which he is saved, and of enabling him to read a
little in the sacred books by which his belief is conveyed. Christian
controversies, with their competition for adherents, ploughed the ground
for the harvest of popular education. In England, for instance, by the
thirties and forties of the nineteenth century, the disputes of the
sects and the necessity of catching adherents young had produced an
abundance of night schools, Sunday schools, and a series of competing
educational organizations for children, the dissenting British schools,
the church National Schools, and even Roman Catholic elementary schools.
The earlier, less enlightened manufacturers, unable to take a broad view
of their own interests, hated and opposed these schools. But here again
needy Germany led her richer neighbours. The religious teacher found the
profit-seeker at his side, unexpectedly eager to get the commonalty, if
not educated, at least “trained.” The student of the English magazines
of the middle and later Victorian period may trace the steadily
spreading recognition of the new necessity for popular education. The
upper and middle classes of England, themselves by no means well
educated, for a generation or so regarded popular education with a sort
of tittering hostility. In the middle Victorian period it was thought to
be extraordinarily funny that a shop assistant should lean across the
counter and ask two lady customers not to speak French, as he
“understood the langwidge.” This was a “joke” in that monumental record
of British humour, _Punch_. It was almost as amusing to the Victorian
English as the story of Balaam’s ass. The German competitor later on
robbed that joke of its fun. Before the death of Queen Victoria, English
shop assistants were being badgered to attend evening classes to learn
French.