We have already (§ 5) pointed out the very broad differences between the
Russian and the Western communities, and the strong reasons there are
for doubting that they will move upon parallel lines and act in similar
ways. The Russian masses were cut off by want of education and sympathy
from the small civilized community of prosperous and educated people
which lived upon them. These latter were a little separate nation. The
masses below have thrown that separate nation off and destroyed it and
begun again, so to speak, upon a new sort of society which, whether it
succeed or collapse, cannot fail to be of intense interest to all
mankind. But there is much more unity of thought and feeling between
class and class in the West than in Russia, and particularly in the
Atlantic communities. Even if they wrangle, classes can talk together
and understand each other. There is no unbroken stratum of illiterates.
The groups of rich and speculative men, the “bad men” in business and
affairs, whose freedoms are making the very name of “private enterprise”
stink in the nostrils of the ordinary man, are only the more active
section of very much larger classes, guilty perhaps of indolence and
self-indulgence, but capable of being roused to a sense not merely of
the wickedness but of the danger of systematic self-seeking in a
strained, impoverished, and sorely tried world. Many of these more
reasonable and moral people have shown themselves clearly aware of the
nature of the present situation, and some of them have made speeches and
delivered sermons and written books--often addressed to the working
classes--expressing very generous and unselfish views. Speeches and
sermons and books will in themselves do little to allay the gathering
wrath of classes ill housed, ill fed, and unhealthy, and angry because
they believe things are so through the reckless greed of others; but
such utterances are valuable as admissions, and if these good
intentions, encouraged perhaps and aided by a certain pressure from
below, presently develop into a resolute combining and direction of the
energies of private enterprise--for a time at least--towards socially
necessary work and a restriction of speculation and luxury, and if there
begin a rapid provision, even at some cost to the hoards and
satisfactions of the successful classes, of the decent homes and
gardens, of the pleasant public surroundings, the health services and
the education and leisure needed to tranquillize the fiercer
discontents, it is still possible that readjustment rather than
revolution will be the method of the Atlantic communities. But that
readjustment cannot be indefinitely delayed; it must come soon.