But for a time the personal quality of Oliver Cromwell and the
discipline and strength of the army he had created maintained England in
the republican course she had taken. The Irish Catholics had made a
massacre of the Protestant English in Ireland, and now Cromwell
suppressed the Irish insurrection with great vigour. Except for certain
friars at the storm of Drogheda, none but men with arms in their hands
were killed by his troops; but the atrocities of the massacre were fresh
in his mind, no quarter was given in battle, and so his memory still
rankles in the minds of the Irish, who have a long memory for their own
wrongs. After Ireland came Scotland, where Cromwell shattered a Royalist
army at the Battle of Dunbar (1650). Then he turned his attention to
Holland, which country had rashly seized upon the divisions among the
English as an excuse for the injury of a trade rival. The Dutch were
then the rulers of the sea, and the English fleet fought against odds;
but after a series of obstinate sea fights the Dutch were driven from
the British seas and the English took their place as the ascendant naval
power. Dutch and French ships must dip their flags to them. An English
fleet went into the Mediterranean--the first English naval force to
enter those waters; it put right various grievances of the English
shippers with Tuscany and Malta, and bombarded the pirate nest of
Algiers and destroyed the pirate fleet--which in the lax days of Charles
had been wont to come right up to the coast of Cornwall and Devon to
intercept ships and carry off slaves to Africa. The strong arm of
England also intervened to protect the Protestants in the south of
France, who were being hunted to death by the Duke of Savoy. France,
Sweden, Denmark, all found it wiser to overcome their first distaste for
regicide and allied themselves with England. Came a war with Spain, and
the great English Admiral Blake destroyed the Spanish Plate Fleet at
Teneriffe in an action of almost incredible daring. He engaged land
batteries. He was the first man “that brought ships to contemn castles
on the shore.” (He died in 1657, and was buried in Westminster Abbey,
but after the restoration of the monarchy his bones were dug out by the
order of Charles II, and removed to St. Margaret’s, Westminster.) Such
was the figure that England cut in the eyes of the world during her
brief republican days.