Like Japan, Ireland has figured but little in this _Outline of
History_, and for the same reason, because she is an extreme island
country, receiving much, but hitherto giving but little back into the
general drama. Her population is a very mixed one, its basis, and
probably its main substance, being of the dark “Mediterranean” strain,
pre-Nordic and pre-Aryan, like the Basques and the people of Portugal
and south Italy. These people reached the island in Neolithic times; no
Palæolithic remains have been found in Ireland. Over this original basis
there flowed, about the sixth century B.C.--we do not know to what
degree of submergence--a wave of Keltic peoples, in at least sufficient
strength to establish a Keltic language, the Irish Gaelic. There were
comings and goings, invasions and counter-invasions of this and that
Keltic or Kelticized people between Ireland, Scotland, Wales, and
England. The island was Christianized in the fifth century. Later on the
east coast was raided and settled by Northmen, but we do not know to
what extent they altered the racial quality. The Norman-English came in
1169, in the time of Henry II and onward. The Teutonic strain may be as
strong or stronger than the Keltic in modern Ireland. Hitherto Ireland
had been a tribal and barbaric country, with a few centres of security
wherein the artistic tendencies of the more ancient race found scope in
metal-work and the illumination of holy books. Now, in the twelfth
century, there was an imperfect conquest by the English Crown, and
scattered settlements by Normans and English in various parts of the
country. From the outset profound temperamental differences between the
Irish and English were manifest, differences exacerbated by a difference
of language, and these became much more evident after the Protestant
Reformation. The English were naturally a non-sacerdotal people; they
had the Northman’s dislike for and disbelief in priests; the share of
Englishmen in the European Reformation was a leading one. The Irish
found the priest congenial, and resisted the Reformation obstinately and
bitterly.