Philip’s first years of kingship were devoted to the discipline of his
army. Hitherto most of the main battle fighting in the world had been
done by footmen in formation. In the very ancient Sumerian battle-pieces
we see spearmen in close order forming the main battle, just as they did
in the Zulu armies of the nineteenth century; the Greek troops of
Philip’s time were still fighting in that same style; the Theban phalanx
was a mass of infantry holding spears, the hinder ranks thrusting their
longer spears between the front-line men. Such a formation went through
anything less disciplined that opposed it. Mounted archers could, of
course, inflict considerable losses on such a mass of men, and
accordingly, as the horse came into warfare, horsemen appeared on either
side as an accessory to this main battle. The reader must remember that
the horse did not come into very effective use in western war until the
rise of the Assyrians, and then at first only as a chariot horse. The
chariots drove full tilt at the infantry mass and tried to break it.
Unless its discipline was very solid they succeeded. The Homeric
fighting is chariot fighting. It is not until the last thousand years
B.C. that we begin to find mounted soldiers, as distinct from
charioteers, playing a part in warfare. At first they appear to have
fought in a scattered fashion, each man doing his personal feats. So the
Lydians fought against Cyrus. It was Philip who seems to have created
charging cavalry. He caused his “companions” to drill for a massed
charge. And also he strengthened his phalanx by giving the rear men
longer spears than had been used hitherto, and so deepening its mass.
The Macedonian phalanx was merely a more solid version of the Theban
phalanx. None of these massed infantry formations was flexible enough to
stand a flank or rear attack. They had very slight manœuvring power.
Both Philip’s and his son’s victories followed, therefore, with
variations, one general scheme of co-operation between these two arms.
The phalanx advanced in the centre and held the enemy’s main body; on
one wing or the other the cavalry charges swept away the enemy cavalry,
and then swooped round upon the flank and rear of the enemy phalanx, the
front of which the Macedonian phalanx was already smiting. The enemy
main battle then broke and was massacred. As Alexander’s military
experience grew, he also added a use of catapults in the field, big
stone-throwing affairs, to break up the enemy infantry. Before his time
catapults had been used in sieges, but never in battles. He invented
“artillery preparation.”