“The joint family remains together sometimes for several generations,
until it becomes too unwieldy, when it breaks up into smaller families,
and you thus see whole villages peopled by members of the same clan. I
have said that the family is a co-operative society, and it may be
likened to a small state, and is kept in its place by strong discipline
based on love and obedience. You see nearly every day the younger
members coming to the head of the family and taking the dust of his feet
as a token of benediction; whenever they go on an enterprise, they take
his leave and carry his blessing.... There are many bonds which bind the
family together--the bonds of sympathy, of common pleasures, of common
sorrows; when a death occurs, all the members go into mourning; when
there is a birth or a wedding, the whole family rejoices. Then above all
is the family deity, some image of Vishnu, the preserver; his place is
in a separate room, generally known as the room of God, or in well-to-do
families in a temple attached to the house, where the family performs
its daily worship. There is a sense of personal attachment between this
image of the deity and the family, for the image generally comes down
from past generations, often miraculously acquired by a pious ancestor
at some remote time.... With the household gods is intimately associated
the family priest.... The Hindu priest is a part of the family life of
his flock, between whom and himself the tie has existed for many
generations. The priest is not generally a man of much learning; he
knows, however, the traditions of his faith.... He is not a very heavy
burden, for he is satisfied with little--a few handfuls of rice, a few
home-grown bananas or vegetables, a little unrefined sugar made in the
village, and sometimes a few pieces of copper are all that is needed....
A picture of our family life would be incomplete without the household
servants. A female servant is known as the ‘jhi,’ or daughter, in
Bengal--she is like the daughter of the house; she calls the master and
the mistress father and mother, and the young men and women of the
family brothers and sisters. She participates in the life of the family;
she goes to the holy places along with her mistress, for she could not
go alone, and generally she spends her life with the family of her
adoption; her children are looked after by the family. The treatment of
men servants is very similar. These servants, men and women, are
generally people of the humbler castes, but a sense of personal
attachment grows up between them and the members of the family, and as
they get on in years they are affectionately called by the younger
members elder brothers, uncles, aunts, etc.... In a well-to-do house
there is always a resident teacher, who instructs the children of the
family as well as other boys of the village; there is no expensive
school building, but room is found in some veranda or shed in the
courtyard for the children and their teacher, and into this school
low-caste boys are freely admitted. These indigenous schools were not of
a very high order, but they supplied an agency of instruction for the
masses which was probably not available in many other countries....