These things, the steam railway and the electric telegraph, were to the
popular imagination of the middle nineteenth century the most striking
and revolutionary of inventions, but they were only the most
conspicuous and clumsy firstfruits of a far more extensive process.
Technical knowledge and skill were developing with an extraordinary
rapidity, and to an extraordinary extent measured by the progress of any
previous age. Far less conspicuous at first in everyday life, but
finally far more important, was the extension of man’s power over
various structural materials. Before the middle of the eighteenth
century iron was reduced from its ores by means of wood-charcoal, was
handled in small pieces, and hammered and wrought into shape. It was
material for a craftsman. Quality and treatment were enormously
dependent upon the experience and sagacity of the individual iron
worker. The largest masses of iron that could be dealt with under those
conditions amounted at most (in the sixteenth century) to two or three
tons. (There was a very definite upward limit, therefore, to the size of
cannon.) The blast furnace arose in the eighteenth century, and
developed with the use of coke. Not before the eighteenth century do we
find rolled sheet iron (1728) and rolled rods and bars (1783). Nasmyth’s
steam hammer came as late as 1838. The ancient world, because of its
metallurgical inferiority, could not use steam. The steam engine, even
the primitive pumping engine, could not develop before sheet iron was
available. The early engines seem to the modern eye very pitiful and
clumsy bits of ironmongery, but they were the utmost that the
metallurgical science of the time could do. As late as 1856 came the
Bessemer process, and presently (1864) the open-hearth process, in which
steel and every sort of iron could be melted, purified, and cast in a
manner and upon a scale hitherto unheard of. To-day in the electric
furnace one may see tons of incandescent steel swirling about like
boiling milk in a saucepan. Nothing in the previous practical advances
of mankind is comparable in its consequences to the complete mastery
over enormous masses of steel and iron and over their texture and
quality which man has now achieved. The railways and early engines of
all sorts were the mere first triumphs of the new metallurgical methods.
Presently came ships of iron and steel, vast bridges, and a new way of
building with steel upon a gigantic scale. Men realized too late that
they had planned their railways with far too timid a gauge, that they
could have organized their travelling with far more steadiness and
comfort upon a much bigger scale.