We may hesitate here to guess at the answer to that question. But a very
great deal has been made of the fact that wherever sowing occurs among
primitive people in any part of the world, it is accompanied by a human
sacrifice or by some ceremony which may be interpreted as the mitigation
and vestige of an ancient sacrificial custom. This is the theme of Sir
J. G. Frazer’s _Golden Bough_. From this it has been supposed that the
first sowings were in connection with the burial of a human being,
either through wild grain being put with the dead body as food or
through the scattering of grain over the body. It may be argued that
there is only one reason why man should have disturbed the surface of
the earth before he took to agriculture, and that was to bury his dead;
and in order to bury a dead body and make a mound over it, it was
probably necessary for him to disturb the surface over a considerable
area. Neolithic man’s chief apparatus for mound-making consisted of
picks of deer’s horn and shovels of their shoulder-blades, and with this
he would have found great difficulty in making a deep excavation. Nor
do we find such excavations beside the barrows. Instead of going down
into tough sub-soil, the mound-makers probably scraped up some of the
surface soil and carried it to the mound. All this seems probable, and
it gives just that wide area of bared and turned-over earth upon which
an eared grass, such as barley, millet, or primitive wheat, might have
seeded and grown. Moreover, the mound-makers, being busy with the mound,
would not have time to hunt meat, and if they were accustomed to store
and eat wild grain, they would be likely to scatter grain, and the grain
would be blown by the wind out of their rude vessels over the area they
were disturbing. And if they were bringing up seed in any quantity in
baskets and pots to bury with the corpse, some of it might easily blow
and be scattered over the fresh earth. Returning later to the region of
the mound, they would discover an exceptionally vigorous growth of food
grain, and it would be a natural thing to associate it with the buried
person, and regard it as a consequence of his death and burial. He had
given them back the grain they gave him increased a hundredfold.