One cannot foretell the surprises or disappointments the future has in
store. Before this chapter of the World State can begin fairly in our
histories, other chapters as yet unsuspected may still need to be
written, as long and as full of conflict as our account of the growth
and rivalries of the Great Powers. There may be tragic economic
struggles, grim grapplings of race with race and class with class. We do
not know; we cannot tell. These are unnecessary disasters, but they may
be unavoidable disasters. Human history becomes more and more a race
between education and catastrophe. Against the unifying effort of
Christendom and against the unifying influence of the mechanical
revolution, catastrophe won. New falsities may arise and hold men in
some unrighteous and fated scheme of order for a time, before they
collapse amidst the misery and slaughter of generations. Yet, clumsily
or smoothly, the world, it seems, progresses and will progress. In this
_Outline_, in our account of Palæolithic men, we have borrowed a
description from Mr. Worthington Smith of the very highest life in the
world some fifty thousand years ago. It was a bestial life. We have
sketched too the gathering for a human sacrifice, some fifteen thousand
years ago. That scene again is almost incredibly cruel to a modern
civilized reader. Yet it is not more than five hundred years since the
great empire of the Aztecs still believed that it could live only by the
shedding of blood. Every year in Mexico hundreds of human victims died
in this fashion: the body was bent like a bow over the curved stone of
sacrifice, the breast was slashed open with a knife of obsidian, and the
priest tore out the beating heart of the still living victim. The day
may be close at hand when we shall no longer tear out the hearts of men,
even for the sake of our national gods. Let the reader but refer to the
earlier time charts we have given in this history, and he will see the
true measure and transitoriness of all the conflicts, deprivations, and
miseries of this present period of painful and yet hopeful change.