Long before the seed of criticism that Frederick II had sown had
germinated in men’s minds and produced its inevitable crop of rebellion,
there was apparent a strong feeling in Christendom that all was not well
with the spiritual atmosphere. There began movements, movements that
nowadays we should call “revivalist,” within the church, that implied
rather than uttered a criticism of the sufficiency of her existing
methods and organization. Men sought fresh forms of righteous living
outside the monasteries and priesthood. One notable figure is that of
St. Francis of Assisi (1181-1226). We cannot tell here in any detail of
how this pleasant young gentleman gave up all the amenities and ease of
his life and went forth to seek God; the opening of the story is not
unlike the early experiences of Gautama Buddha. He had a sudden
conversion in the midst of a life of pleasure, and, taking a vow of
extreme poverty, he gave himself up to an imitation of the life of
Christ, and to the service of the sick and wretched, and more
particularly to the service of the lepers, who then abounded in Italy.
He was joined by great multitudes of disciples, and so the first Friars
of the Franciscan Order came into existence. An order of women devotees
was set up beside the original confraternity, and in addition great
numbers of men and women were brought into less formal association. He
preached, unmolested by the Moslems, be it noted, in Egypt and
Palestine, though the Fifth Crusade was then in progress. His relations
with the church are still a matter for discussion.[360] His work had
been sanctioned by Pope Innocent III, but while he was in the East there
was a reconstitution of his order, intensifying its discipline and
substituting authority for responsive impulse, and as a consequence of
these changes he resigned its headship. To the end he clung passionately
to the ideal of poverty, but he was hardly dead before the order was
holding property through trustees and building a great church and
monastery to his memory at Assisi. The disciplines of the order that
were applied after his death to his immediate associates are scarcely to
be distinguished from a persecution; several of the more conspicuous
zealots for simplicity were scourged, others were imprisoned, one was
killed while attempting to escape, and Brother Bernard, the “first
disciple,” passed a year in the woods and hills, hunted like a wild
beast.