In an outline such as this it is impossible to crowd in the clustering
events of history that do not clearly show the main process of human
development, however bright and picturesque they may be. We have to
record the steady growth of towns and cities, the reviving power of
trade and money, the gradual re-establishment of law and custom, the
extension of security, the supersession of private warfare that went on
in Western Europe in the period between the First Crusade and the
sixteenth century. Of much that looms large in our national histories we
cannot tell anything. We have no space for the story of the repeated
attempts of the English kings to conquer Scotland and set themselves up
as kings of France, nor of how the Norman English established themselves
insecurely in Ireland (twelfth century), and how Wales was linked to the
English crown (1282). All through the Middle Ages the struggle of
England with Scotland and France was in progress; there were times when
it seemed that Scotland was finally subjugated and when the English king
held far more land in France than its titular sovereign. In the English
histories this struggle with France is too often represented as a
single-handed and almost successful attempt to conquer France. In
reality it was a joint enterprise undertaken in concert with the
powerful French vassal state of Burgundy to conquer and divide the
patrimony of Hugh Capet.[391] Of the English rout by the Scotch at
Bannockburn (1314), and of William Wallace and Robert the Bruce, the
Scottish national heroes, of the battles of Crecy (1346) and Poitiers
(1356) and Agincourt (1415) in France, which shine like stars in the
English imagination, little battles in which sturdy bowmen through some
sunny hours made a great havoc among French knights in armour, of the
Black Prince and Henry V of England, and of how a peasant girl, Joan of
Arc, the Maid of Orleans, drove the English out of her country again
(1429-1430), this history relates nothing. For every country has such
cherished national events. They are the ornamental tapestry of history,
and no part of the building. Rajputana or Poland, Russia, Spain, Persia,
and China can all match or outdo the utmost romance of western Europe,
with equally adventurous knights and equally valiant princesses and
equally stout fights against the odds. Nor can we tell how Louis XI of
France (1461-1483), the son of Joan of Arc’s Charles VII, brought
Burgundy to heel and laid the foundations of a centralized French
monarchy. It signifies more that in the thirteenth and fourteenth
centuries, gunpowder, that Mongol gift, came to Europe so that the kings
(Louis XI included) and the law, relying upon the support of the growing
towns, were able to batter down the castles of the half-independent
robber knights and barons of the earlier Middle Ages and consolidate a
more centralized power. The fighting nobles and knights of the barbaric
period disappear slowly from history during these centuries; the
Crusades consumed them, such dynastic wars as the English Wars of the
Roses killed them off, the arrows from the English long-bow pierced them
and stuck out a yard behind, infantry so armed swept them from the
stricken field; they became reconciled to trade and changed their
nature. They disappeared in everything but a titular sense from the west
and south of Europe before they disappeared from Germany. The knight in
Germany remained a professional fighting man into the sixteenth century.