But the mechanical revolution was not only pressing education upon the
whole population, it was leading to a big-capitalism and to a
large-scale reorganization of industry that was to produce a new and
distinctive system of ideas in the common people in the place of the
mere uncomfortable recalcitrance and elemental rebellions of an
illiterate commonalty. We have already noted how the industrial
revolution had split the manufacturing class, which had hitherto been a
middling and various sort of class, into two sections, the employers,
who became rich enough to mingle with the financial, merchandizing, and
landowning classes, and the employees, who drifted to a status closer
and closer to that of mere gang and agricultural labour. As the
manufacturing employee sank, the agricultural labourer, by the
introduction of agricultural machinery and the increase in his
individual productivity, rose. By the middle of the nineteenth century,
Karl Marx (1818-83), a German Jew of great scholarly attainments, who
did much of his work in the British Museum library in London, was
pointing out that the organization of the working classes by the
steadily concentrating group of capitalist owners, was developing a new
social classification to replace the more complex class systems of the
past (see chapter xx, §§ 4, 5, and 6). Property, so far as it was power,
was being gathered together into relatively few hands, the hands of the
big rich men, the capitalist class; while there was a great mingling of
workers with little or no property, whom he called the “expropriated,”
or “proletariat”--a misuse of this word (see chap. xxvii, § 2)--who were
bound to develop a common “class consciousness” of the conflict of their
interests with those of the rich men. Differences of education and
tradition between the various older social elements which were in
process of being fused up into the new class of the expropriated, seemed
for a time to contradict this sweeping generalization; the traditions of
the professions, the small employers, the farmer peasant and the like
were all different from one another and from the various craftsman
traditions of the workers; but with the spread of education and the
cheapening of literature, this “Marxian” generalization becomes now more
and more acceptable. These classes, who were linked at first by nothing
but a common impoverishment, were and are being reduced or raised to the
same standard of life, forced to read the same books and share the same
inconveniences. A sense of solidarity between all sorts of poor and
propertyless men, as against the profit-amassing and
wealth-concentrating class, is growing more and more evident in our
world. Old differences fade away, the difference between craftsman and
open-air worker, between black coat and overall, between poor clergyman
and elementary school-master, between policeman and bus-driver. They
must all buy the same cheap furnishings and live in similar cheap
houses; their sons and daughters will all mingle and marry; success at
the upper levels becomes more and more hopeless for the rank and file.
Marx, who did not so much advocate the class-war, the war of the
expropriated mass against the appropriating few, as foretell it, is
being more and more justified by events.[462]