Now, upon that matter the teller of modern history is obliged to be at
once cautious and bold. He has to pick his way between cowardly evasion
on the one hand, and partisanship on the other. As far as possible he
must confine himself to facts and restrain his opinions. Yet it is well
to remember that no opinions can be altogether restrained. The writer
has his own very strong and definite persuasions, and the reader must
bear that in mind. It is a fact in history that the teaching of Jesus of
Nazareth had in it something profoundly new and creative; he preached a
new Kingdom of Heaven in the hearts and in the world of men. There was
nothing in his teaching, so far as we can judge it at this distance of
time, to clash or interfere with any discovery or expansion of the
history of the world and mankind. But it is equally a fact in history
that St. Paul and his successors added to or completed or imposed upon
or substituted another doctrine for--as you may prefer to think--the
plain and profoundly revolutionary teachings of Jesus by expounding a
subtle and complex theory of salvation, a salvation which could be
attained very largely by belief and formalities, without any serious
disturbance of the believer’s ordinary habits and occupations, and that
this Pauline teaching did involve very definite beliefs about the
history of the world and man. It is not the business of the historian to
controvert or explain these matters; the question of their ultimate
significance depends upon the theologian; the historian’s concern is
merely with the fact that official Christianity throughout the world
adopted St. Paul’s view so plainly expressed in his epistles and so
untraceable in the gospels, that the meaning of religion lay not in the
future, but in the past, and that Jesus was not so much a teacher of
wonderful new things, as a predestinate divine blood sacrifice of deep
mystery and sacredness made in atonement of a particular historical act
of disobedience to the Creator committed by our first parents, Adam and
Eve, in response to the temptation of a serpent in the Garden of Eden.
Upon the belief in that Fall as a fact, and not upon the personality of
Jesus of Nazareth, upon the theories of Paul, and not upon the
injunctions of Jesus, doctrinal Christianity built itself.