The immediate effect of this great dispute upon the ideas and methods of
people in the prosperous and influential classes throughout the
westernized world was very detrimental indeed. The new biological
science was bringing nothing constructive as yet to replace the old
moral stand-bys. A real de-moralization ensued. The general level of
social life in those classes was far higher in the early twentieth than
in the early seventeenth century, but in one respect, in respect to
disinterestedness and conscientiousness in these classes, it is probable
that the tone of the earlier age was better than the latter. In the
owning and active classes of the seventeenth century, in spite of a few
definite “infidels,” there was probably a much higher percentage of men
and women who prayed sincerely, who searched their souls to find if they
had done evil, and who were prepared to suffer and make great sacrifices
for what they conceived to be right, than in the opening years of the
twentieth century. There was a real loss of faith after 1859. The true
gold of religion was in many cases thrown away with the worn-out purse
that had contained it for so long, and it was not recovered. Towards the
close of the nineteenth century a crude misunderstanding of Darwinism
had become the fundamental mindstuff of great masses of the “educated”
everywhere. The seventeenth-century kings and owners and rulers and
leaders had had the idea at the back of their minds that they prevailed
by the will of God; they really feared Him, they got priests to put
things right for them with Him; when they were wicked, they tried not to
think of Him. But the old faith of the kings, owners, and rulers of the
opening twentieth century had faded under the actinic light of
scientific criticism. Prevalent peoples at the close of the nineteenth
century believed that they prevailed by virtue of the Struggle for
Existence, in which the strong and cunning get the better of the weak
and confiding. And they believed further that they had to be strong,
energetic, ruthless, “practical,” egotistical, because God was dead, and
had always, it seemed, been dead--which was going altogether further
than the new knowledge justified.