Here then we take up the main thread of human history again. We must
hark back to 6000 B.C. or even earlier. But although we shall go back
so far, the people we shall describe are people already in some respects
beyond the Neolithic Aryans of three thousand years later, more
particularly in their social organization and their material welfare.
While in Central Europe and Central Asia the primitive Neolithic way of
life was becoming more migratory and developing into nomadism, in the
great river valleys it is becoming more settled and localized. It is
still doubtful whether we are to consider Mesopotamia or Egypt the
earlier scene of the two parallel beginnings of settled communities
living in towns. By 4000 B.C., in both these regions of the earth,
such communities existed, and had been going on for a very considerable
time. The excavations of the American expedition[99] at Nippur have
unearthed evidence of a city community existing there at least as early
as 5000 B.C., and probably as early as 6000 B.C., an earlier date
than anything we know of in Egypt. De Candolle asserts that it is only
in the Euphrates-Tigris district that wheat has ever been found growing
wild.[100] It may be that from Mesopotamia as a centre the cultivation
of wheat spread over the entire eastern hemisphere. Or it may be that
wheat grew wild in some regions now submerged. There may have been a
wild wheat region in what is now the sea bottom of the eastern
Mediterranean. But cultivation is not civilization; the growing of wheat
had spread from the Atlantic to the Pacific with the distribution of the
Neolithic culture by perhaps 10,000 or 9000 B.C., before the
beginnings of civilization. Civilization is something more than the
occasional seasonal growing of wheat. It is the settlement of men upon
an area continuously cultivated and possessed, who live in buildings
continuously inhabited with a common rule and a common city or citadel.
For a long time civilization may quite possibly have developed in
Mesopotamia without any relations with the parallel beginnings in Egypt.
The two settlements may have been quite independent, arising separately
out of the widely diffused Heliolithic Neolithic culture. Or they may
have had a common origin in the region of the Mediterranean, the Red
Sea, and southern Arabia.