While the main fronts of the chief combatants were in this state of
exhaustive deadlock, both sides were attempting to strike round behind
the front of their adversaries. The Germans made a series of Zeppelin,
and later of aeroplane, raids upon Paris and the east of England.
Ostensibly these aimed at depôts, munition works, and the like targets
of military importance, but practically they bombed promiscuously at
inhabited places. At first these raiders dropped not very effective
bombs, but later the size and quality of these missiles increased,
considerable numbers of people were killed and injured, and very much
damage was done. The English people were roused to a pitch of extreme
indignation by these outrages.[506] Although the Germans had possessed
Zeppelins for some years, no one in authority in Great Britain had
thought out the proper methods of dealing with them, and it was not
until late in 1916 that an adequate supply of anti-aircraft guns was
brought into play and that these raiders were systematically attacked by
aeroplanes. Then came a series of Zeppelin disasters, and after the
spring of 1917 they ceased to be used for any purpose but sea scouting,
and their place as raiders was taken by large aeroplanes (the Gothas).
The visits of these latter machines to London and the east of England
became systematic after the summer of 1917. All through the winter of
1917-18, London on every moonlight night became familiar with the
banging of warning maroons, the shrill whistles of the police alarm, the
hasty clearance of the streets, the distant rumbling of scores and
hundreds of anti-aircraft guns growing steadily to a wild uproar of
thuds and crashes, the swish of flying shrapnel, and at last, if any of
the raiders got through the barrage, with the dull heavy bang of the
bursting bombs. Then presently, amidst the diminuendo of the gun fire,
would come the inimitable rushing sound of the fire brigade engines and
the hurry of the ambulances.... War was brought home to every Londoner
by these experiences.