And here we come upon one of the chief problems of our lives at the
present time, the problem of the deflection of the profits of progress.
For two hundred years there has been, mainly under the influence of the
spirit of science and enquiry, a steady improvement in the methods of
production of almost everything that humanity requires. If our sense of
community and our social science were equal to the tasks required of
them, there can be little question that this great increment in
production would have benefited the whole community, would have given
everyone an amount of education, leisure and freedom such as mankind had
never dreamt of before. But though the common standard of living has
risen, the rise has been on a scale disproportionately small. The rich
have developed a freedom and luxury unknown in the world hitherto, and
there has been an increase in the proportion of rich people and
stagnantly prosperous and unproductive people in the community; but that
also fails to account for the full benefit. There has been much sheer
waste. Vast accumulations of material and energy have gone into warlike
preparations and warfare. Much has been devoted to the futile efforts of
unsuccessful business competition. Huge possibilities have remained
undeveloped because of the opposition of owners, forestallers, and
speculators to their economical exploitation. The good things that
science and organization have been bringing within the reach of mankind
have not been taken methodically and used to their utmost, but they have
been scrambled for, snatched at, seized upon by gambling adventurers and
employed upon selfish and vain ends. The eighteenth century in Europe,
and more particularly in Great Britain and Poland, was the age of
private ownership. “Private enterprise,” which meant in practice that
everyone was entitled to get everything he could out of the business of
the community, reigned supreme. No sense of obligation to the state in
business matters is to be found in the ordinary novels, plays, and such
like representative literature of the time. Everyone is out “to make his
fortune,” there is no recognition that it is wrong to be an unproductive
parasite on the community, and still less that a financier or merchant
or manufacturer can ever be overpaid for his services to mankind. This
was the moral atmosphere of the time, and those lords and gentlemen who
grabbed the people’s commons, assumed possession of the mines under
their lands, and crushed down the yeoman farmers and peasants to the
status of pauper labourers, had no idea that they were living anything
but highly meritorious lives.