Because it developed in the comparatively warm and tranquil waters of
the eastern Mediterranean, the Red Sea, the Persian Gulf, and the
western horn of the Indian Ocean, the shipping of the ancient world
retained throughout certain characteristics that make it differ very
widely from the ocean-going sailing shipping, with its vast spread of
canvas, of the last four hundred years. “The Mediterranean,” says Mr.
Torr,[123] “is a sea where a vessel with sails may lie becalmed for
days together, while a vessel with oars would easily be traversing the
smooth waters, with coasts and islands everywhere at hand to give her
shelter in case of storm. In that sea, therefore, oars became the
characteristic instruments of navigation, and the arrangement of oars
the chief problem in shipbuilding. And so long as the Mediterranean
nations dominated Western Europe, vessels of the southern type were
built upon the northern coasts, though there generally was wind enough
here for sails and too much wave for oars.... The art of rowing can
first be discerned upon the Nile. Boats with oars are represented in the
earliest pictorial monuments of Egypt, dating from about 2500 B.C.; and
although some crews are paddling with their faces towards the bow,
others are rowing with their faces towards the stern. The paddling is
certainly the older practice, for the hieroglyph chen depicts two arms
grasping an oar in the attitude of paddling, and the hieroglyphs were
invented in the earliest ages. And that practice may really have ceased
before 2500 B.C., despite the testimony of monuments of that date; for
in monuments dating from about 1250 B.C. crews are represented
unmistakably rowing with their faces towards the stern and yet grasping
their oars in the attitude of paddling, so that even then Egyptian
artists mechanically followed the turn of the hieroglyph to which their
hands were accustomed. In these reliefs there are twenty rowers on the
boats on the Nile, and thirty on the ships on the Red Sea; but in the
earliest reliefs the number varies considerably, and seems dependent on
the amount of space at the sculptor’s disposal.”