In the Civil War that ended with the decapitation of Charles I the
sympathies of New England were for the Parliament, and Virginia was
Cavalier; but two hundred and fifty miles separated these settlements,
and there were no serious hostilities. With the return of the monarchy
in 1660, there was a vigorous development of British colonization in
America. Charles II and his associates were greedy for gain, and the
British crown had no wish to make any further experiments in illegal
taxation at home. But the undefined relations of the colonies to the
crown and the British government seemed to afford promise of financial
adventure across the Atlantic. There was a rapid development of
plantations and proprietary colonies. Lord Baltimore had already in 1632
set up a colony that was to be a home of religious freedom for
Catholics under the attractive name of Maryland, to the north and east
of Virginia; and now the Quaker Penn (who was nevertheless a very good
friend of Charles II) established himself to the north at Philadelphia
and founded the colony of Pennsylvania. Its main boundary with Maryland
and Virginia was delimited by two men, Mason and Dixon, whose “Mason and
Dixon line” was destined to become a very important line indeed in the
later affairs of the United States. Carolina, which was originally an
unsuccessful French Protestant establishment, and which owed its name
not to Charles (Carolus) II of England, but to Charles IX of France, had
fallen into English hands and was settled at several points.[422]
Between Maryland and New England stretched a number of small Dutch and
Swedish settlements, of which the chief town was New Amsterdam. These
settlements were captured from the Dutch by the British in 1664, lost
again in 1673, and restored by treaty when Holland and England made
peace in 1674. Thereby the whole coast from Maine to Carolina became in
some form or other a British possession. To the south the Spanish were
established; their headquarters were at Fort St. Augustine in Florida,
and in 1732 the town of Savannah[423] was settled by a philanthropist
Oglethorpe from England, who had taken pity on the miserable people
imprisoned for debt in England, and rescued a number of them from prison
to become the founders of a new colony, Georgia, which was to be a
bulwark against the Spanish. So by the middle of the eighteenth century
we have these settlements along the American coastline: the New England
group of Puritans and free Protestants, Maine (belonging to
Massachusetts), New Hampshire, Connecticut, Rhode Island, and
Massachusetts; the captured Dutch group, which was now divided up into
New York (New Amsterdam rechristened), New Jersey, and Delaware (Swedish
before it was Dutch, and in its earliest British phase attached to
Pennsylvania); then came catholic Maryland; Cavalier Virginia; Carolina
(which was presently divided into North and South), and Oglethorpe’s
Georgia. Later on a number of Tyrolese Protestants took refuge in
Georgia, and there was a considerable immigration of a good class of
German cultivators into Pennsylvania.