So the war began. It was not a war that promised a conclusive end. The
colonists had no one vulnerable capital; they were dispersed over a
great country, with a limitless wilderness behind it, and so they had
great powers of resistance. They had learnt their tactics largely from
the Indians; they could fight well in open order, and harry and destroy
troops in movement. But they had no disciplined army that could meet the
British in a pitched battle, and little military equipment; and their
levies grew impatient at a long campaign, and tended to go home to their
farms. The British, on the other hand, had a well-drilled army, and
their command of the sea gave them the power of shifting their attack up
and down the long Atlantic seaboard. They were at peace with all the
world. But the king was stupid and greedy to interfere in the conduct of
affairs; the generals he favoured were stupid “strong men” or flighty
men of birth and fashion; and the heart of England was not in the
business. He trusted rather to being able to blockade, raid, and annoy
the colonists into submission than to a conclusive conquest and
occupation of the land. But the methods employed, and particularly the
use of hired German troops, who still retained the cruel traditions of
the Thirty Years’ War, and of Indian auxiliaries, who raped and scalped
the outlying settlers, did not so much weary the Americans of the war as
of the British. The Congress, meeting for the second time in 1775,
endorsed the actions of the New England colonists, and appointed George
Washington the American commander-in-chief. In 1777, General Burgoyne,
in an attempt to get down to New York from Canada, was defeated at
Freeman’s Farm on the Upper Hudson, and surrounded and obliged to
capitulate at Saratoga with his whole army. This disaster encouraged the
French and Spanish to come into the struggle on the side of the
colonists. The French sent an army to the States under General
Lafayette, and their fleet did much to minimize the advantage of the
British at sea. General Cornwallis was caught in the Yorktown peninsula
in Virginia in 1781, and capitulated with his army. The British
Government, now heavily engaged with France and Spain in Europe, was at
the end of its resources.