The essential idea of nineteenth-century nationalism was the “legitimate
claim” of every nation to complete sovereignty, the claim of every
nation to manage all its affairs within its own territory, regardless of
any other nation. The flaw in this idea is that the affairs and
interests of every modern community extend to the uttermost parts of the
earth. The assassination of Sarajevo in 1914, for example, which caused
the great war, produced the utmost distress among the Indian tribes of
Labrador because that war interrupted the marketing of the furs upon
which they relied for such necessities as ammunition, without which they
could not get sufficient food. A world of independent sovereign nations
means, therefore, a world of perpetual injuries, a world of states
constantly preparing for or waging war. But concurrently and
discordantly with the preaching of this nationalism of which Gladstone
was the outstanding exponent,[478] there was, among the stronger
nationalities, a vigorous propagation of another set of ideas, the
ideas of imperialism, in which a powerful and advanced nation was
conceded the right to dominate a group of other less advanced nations or
less politically developed nations or peoples whose nationality was
still undeveloped, who were expected by the dominating nation to be
grateful for its protection and dominance. This use of the word empire
was evidently a different one from its former universal significance.
The new empires did not even pretend to be a continuation of the world
empire of Rome. The leading spirit in British imperialism was Lord
Beaconsfield, Gladstone’s antagonist. These two ideas of nationality
and, as the crown of national success, “empire,” ruled European
political thought, ruled indeed the political thought of the world,
throughout the latter half of the nineteenth century, and ruled it to
the practical exclusion of any wider conception of a common human
welfare. They were plausible and dangerously unsound working ideas. They
represented nothing fundamental and inalterable in human nature, and
they failed to meet the new needs of world controls and world security
that the mechanical revolution was every day making more imperative.
They were accepted because people in general had neither the sweeping
views that a scientific study of history can give, nor had they any
longer the comprehensive charity of a world religion. Their danger to
all the routines of ordinary life was not realized until it was too
late.