Throughout the nineteenth century, and particularly throughout its
latter half, there has been a great working up of this nationalism in
the world. All men are by nature partisans and patriots, but the natural
tribalism of men in the nineteenth century was unnaturally exaggerated,
it was fretted and over-stimulated and inflamed and forced into the
nationalist mould. Nationalism was taught in schools, emphasized by
newspapers, preached and mocked and sung into men. Men were brought to
feel that they were as improper without a nationality as without their
clothes in a crowded assembly. Oriental peoples who had never heard of
nationality before, took to it as they took to the cigarettes and bowler
hats of the west. India, a galaxy of contrasted races, religions, and
cultures, Dravidian, Mongolian, and Aryan, became a “nation.” There were
perplexing cases, of course, as when a young Whitechapel Jew had to
decide whether he belonged to the British or the Jewish nation.[477]
Caricature and political cartoons played a large part in this elevation
of the cult of these newer and bigger tribal gods--for such indeed the
modern “nations” are--to their ascendancy over the imagination of the
nineteenth century. If one turns over the pages of _Punch_, that queer
contemporary record of the British soul, which has lasted now since
1841, one finds the figures of Britannia, Hibernia, France, and Germania
embracing, disputing, reproving, rejoicing, grieving. It greatly helped
the diplomatists to carry on their game of Great Powers to convey
politics in this form to the doubting general intelligence. To the
common man, resentful that his son should be sent abroad to be shot, it
was made clear that instead of this being merely the result of the
obstinacy and greed of two foreign offices, it was really a necessary
part of a righteous inevitable gigantic struggle between two of these
dim vast divinities. France had been wronged by Germania, or Italia was
showing a proper spirit to Austria. The boy’s death ceased to appear an
outrage on common sense; it assumed a sort of mythological dignity. And
insurrection could clothe itself in the same romantic habiliments as
diplomacy. Ireland became a Cinderella goddess, Cathleen ni Houlihan,
full of heart-rending and unforgivable wrongs, and young India
transcended its realities in the worship of Bande Mataram.