On December 29th, 1916, the monk Rasputin was murdered at a dinner-party
in Petrograd, and a belated attempt was made to put the Tsardom in
order. By March things were moving rapidly; food riots in Petrograd
developed into a revolutionary insurrection; there was an attempted
suppression of the Duma, the representative body, attempted arrests of
liberal leaders, the formation of a provisional government under Prince
Lvoff, and an abdication (March 15th) by the Tsar. For a time it seemed
that a moderate and controlled revolution might be possible--perhaps
under a new Tsar. Then it became evident that the destruction of
confidence in Russia had gone too far for any such adjustments. The
Russian people were sick to death of the old order of things in Europe,
of Tsars and of wars and great powers; it wanted relief, and that
speedily, from unendurable miseries. The Allies had no understanding of
Russian realities; their diplomatists were ignorant of Russian; genteel
persons, with their attention directed to the Russian Court rather than
Russia, they blundered steadily with the new situation. There was little
goodwill among the diplomatists for republicanism, and a manifest
disposition to embarrass the new government as much as possible. At the
head of the Russian republican government was an eloquent and
picturesque leader, Kerensky, who found himself assailed by the deep
forces of a profounder revolutionary movement, the “social revolution,”
at home and cold-shouldered by the Allied governments abroad. His allies
would neither let him give the Russian people land nor peace beyond
their frontiers. The French and the British press pestered their
exhausted ally for a fresh offensive, but when presently the Germans
made a strong attack by sea and land upon Riga, the British Admiralty
quailed before the prospect of a Baltic expedition in relief. The new
Russian republic had to fight unsupported. In spite of their great naval
predominance and the bitter protests of the great English admiral, Lord
Fisher (1841-1920), it is to be noted that the Allies, except for some
submarine attacks, left the Germans the complete mastery of the Baltic
throughout the war.