We have tried in this account, and with the help of maps and figures and
time charts, to give a just idea of the order and shape of these fifty
or sixty centuries. Our business is with that outline. We have named but
a few names of individuals; though henceforth the personal names must
increase in number. But the content of this outline that we have drawn
here in a few diagrams and charts cannot but touch the imagination. If
only we could look closelier, we should see through all these sixty
centuries a procession of lives more and more akin in their fashion to
our own. We have shown how the naked Palæolithic savage gave place to
the Neolithic cultivator, a type of man still to be found in the
backward places of the world. We have given an illustration of Sumerian
soldiers copied from a carved stone that was set up long before the days
when the Semitic Sargon I conquered the land. Day by day some busy
brownish man carved those figures, and, no doubt, whistled as he carved.
In those days the plain of the Egyptian delta was crowded with gangs of
swarthy workmen unloading the stone that had come down the Nile to add a
fresh course to the current pyramid. One might paint a thousand scenes
from those ages: of some hawker merchant in Egypt spreading his stock of
Babylonish garments before the eyes of some pretty, rich lady; of a
miscellaneous crowd swarming between the pylons to some temple festival
at Thebes; of an excited, dark-eyed audience of Cretans like the
Spaniards of to-day, watching a bull-fight, with the bull-fighters in
trousers and tightly girded, exactly like any contemporary bull-fighter;
of children learning their cuneiform signs--at Nippur the clay exercise
tiles of a school have been found; of a woman with a sick husband at
home slipping into some great temple in Carthage to make a vow for his
recovery. Or perhaps it is a wild Greek, skin-clad and armed with a
bronze axe, standing motionless on some Illyrian mountain crest, struck
with amazement at his first vision of a many-oared Cretan galley
crawling like a great insect across the amethystine mirror of the
Adriatic Sea. He went home to tell his folk a strange story of a
monster, Briareus with his hundred arms. Of millions of such stitches in
each of these 200 generations is the fabric of this history woven. But
unless they mark the presence of a primary seam or join, we cannot pause
now to examine any of these stitches.