These are the broad features of the project which is called Socialism.
We will discuss its incompletenesses and inadequacies in our next
section. It was perhaps inevitable that socialism should be greatly
distraught and subdivided by doubts and disputes and sects and schools;
they are growth symptoms like the spots on a youth’s face. Here we can
but glance at the difference between state socialism, which would run
the economic business of the country through its political government,
and the newer schools of syndicalism and guild socialism which would
entrust a large measure in the government of each industry to the
workers of every grade--including the directors and managers--engaged in
that industry. This “guild socialism” is really a new sort of capitalism
with a committee of workers and officials in each industry taking the
place of the free private capitalists of that industry. The _personnel_
becomes the collective capitalist. Nor can we discuss the undemocratic
idea of the Russian leader Lenin, that a population cannot judge of
socialism before it has experienced it, and that a group of socialists
are therefore justified in seizing and socializing, if they can, the
life of a country without at first setting up any democratic form of
general government at all, for which sort of seizure he uses the Marxian
phrase, a very incompetent phrase, the “dictatorship of the
proletariat.” All Russia now is a huge experiment in that dictatorship
(August, 1920).[467] The “proletariat” is supposed to be dictating
through committees of workmen and soldiers, the Soviets, but at present
we have no means of ascertaining how far Russian affairs are under the
direction of a genuine mass intelligence and will, and how far the
activities of the Soviets are restrained and directed by the group of
vigorous personalities which leads the revolution. Nor do we know if the
methods of election used for the Soviets are any improvement upon the
unsatisfactory methods in use in the Atlantic democracies. Non-workers
have no representation in this new Russian state.