We have already, in our first account of Chinese beginnings, noted the
existence of these Huns. It is necessary now to explain briefly who and
what they were. Even in using this word Hun as a general equivalent for
the Hiung-nu, we step on to controversial ground. In our accounts of the
development of the Western world we have had occasion to name the
Scythians, and to explain the difficulty of distinguishing clearly
between Cimmerians, Sarmatians, Medes, Persians, Parthians, Goths, and
other more or less nomadic, more or less Aryan peoples who drifted to
and fro in a great arc between the Danube and Central Asia. While
sections of the Aryans were moving south and acquiring and developing
civilization, these other Aryan peoples were developing mobility and
nomadism; they were learning the life of the tent, the wagon, and the
herd. They were learning also to use milk as a food basis, and were
probably becoming less agricultural, less disposed to take even snatch
crops, than they had been. Their development was being aided by a slow
change in climate that was replacing the swamps and forests and
parklands of South Russia and Central Asia by steppes, by wide grazing
lands that is, which favoured a healthy, unsettled life, and
necessitated an annual movement between summer and winter pasture. These
peoples had only the lowest political forms; they split up, they mingled
together; the various races had identical social habits; and so it is
that the difficulty, the impossibility of sharp distinctions between
them arises. Now the case of the Mongolian races to the north and
north-west of the Chinese civilization is very parallel. There can be
little doubt that the Hiung-nu, the Huns, and the later people called
the Mongols, were all very much the same people, and that the Turks and
Tartars presently branched off from this same drifting Mongolian
population. Kalmucks and Buriats are later developments of the same
strain. Here we shall favour the use of the word “Hun” as a sort of
general term for these tribes, just as we have been free and wide in our
use of “Scythian” in the West.