Christendom retained at least the formal tradition of this general unity
of spirit until 1054, when the Latin-speaking Western church and the
main and original Greek-speaking church, the “Orthodox” church, severed
themselves from one another, ostensibly upon the question of adding two
words to the creed. The older creed had declared that the “Holy Ghost
proceeded from the Father.” The Latins wanted to add, and did add
“_Filioque_” (=and from the son), and placed the Greeks out of their
communion because they would not follow this lead. But already as early
as the fifth century the Christians in Eastern Syria, Persia, Central
Asia--there were churches at Merv, Herat, and Samarkand--and India had
detached themselves on a similar score. These extremely interesting
Asiatic Christians are known in history as the Nestorian Church, and
their influence extended into China. The Egyptian and Abyssinian
churches also detached themselves very early upon similarly inexplicable
points. Long before this formal separation of the Latin and
Greek-speaking halves of the main church, however, there was a practical
separation following upon the breaking up of the empire. Their
conditions diverged from the first. While the Greek-speaking Eastern
Empire held together and the emperor at Constantinople remained dominant
in the Church, the Latin half of the empire, as we have already told,
collapsed, and left the Church free of any such imperial control.
Moreover, while ecclesiastical authority in the empire of Constantinople
was divided between the high-bishops, or patriarchs, of Constantinople,
Antioch, Alexandria, and Jerusalem, authority in the West was
concentrated in the patriarch, or Pope, of Rome. The Bishop of Rome had
always been recognized as first among the patriarchs, and all these
things conspired to justify exceptional pretensions upon his part to a
quasi-imperial authority. With the final fall of the Western Empire, he
took over the ancient title of _pontifex maximus_ which the emperors had
held, and so became the supreme sacrificial priest of the Roman
tradition. Over the Christians of the West his supremacy was fully
recognized, but from the beginning it had to be urged with discretion
within the dominions of the Eastern emperor and the jurisdictions of the
other four patriarchs.