The state of the Chinese civilization was equally inviting to an
enterprising invader. One last glimpse of China in this history was in
the seventh century during the opening years of the Tang dynasty, when
that shrewd and able emperor Tai-tsung was weighing the respective
merits of Nestorian Christianity, Islam, Buddhism, and the teachings of
Lao Tse, and on the whole inclining to the opinion that Lao Tse was as
good a teacher as any. We have described his reception of the traveller
Yuan Chwang. Tai-tsung tolerated all religions, but several of his
successors conducted a pitiless persecution of the Buddhist faith; it
flourished in spite of these persecutions, and its monasteries played a
somewhat analogous part in at first sustaining learning and afterwards
retarding it, that the Christian monastic organization did in the West.
By the tenth century the great Tang dynasty was in an extreme state of
decay; the usual degenerative process through a series of voluptuaries
and incapables had gone on, and China broke up again politically into a
variable number of contending states, “The age of the Ten States,” an
age of confusion that lasted through the first half of the tenth
century. Then arose a dynasty, the Northern Sung (960-1127), which
established a sort of unity, but which was in constant struggle with a
number of Hunnish peoples from the north who were pressing down the
eastern coast. For a time one of these peoples, the Khitan, prevailed.
In the twelfth century these people had been subjugated and had given
place to another Hunnish empire, the empire of the Kin, with its capital
at Pekin and its southern boundary south of Hwangho. The Sung empire
shrank before this Kin empire. In 1138 the capital was shifted from
Nankin, which was now too close to the northern frontier, to the city of
Han Chau on the coast. From 1127 onward to 1295, the Sung dynasty is
known as the Southern Sung. To the northwest of its territories there
was now the Tartar empire of the Hsia; to the north, the Kin empire,
both states in which the Chinese population was under rulers in whom
nomadic traditions were still strong. So that here on the east also the
main masses of Asiatic mankind were under uncongenial rulers and ready
to accept, if not to welcome, the arrival of a conqueror.