A third form of government that prevailed increasingly in Greece in the
sixth, fifth, and fourth centuries B.C., was known as _democracy_. As
the modern world nowadays is constantly talking of democracy, and as the
modern idea of democracy is something widely different from the
democracy of the Greek city states, it will be well to be very explicit
upon the meaning of democracy in Greece. Democracy then was government
by the commonalty, the Demos; it was government by the whole body of the
citizens, by the many as distinguished from the few. But let the modern
reader mark that word “citizen.” The slave was excluded, the freedman
was excluded, the stranger; even the Greek born in the city, whose
father had come eight or ten miles from the city beyond the headland,
was excluded. The earlier democracies (but not all) demanded a property
qualification from the citizen, and property in those days was land;
this was subsequently relaxed, but the modern reader will grasp that
here was something very different from modern democracy. At the end of
the fifth century B.C. this property qualification had been abolished in
Athens, for example; but Pericles, a great Athenian statesman of whom we
shall have more to tell later, had established a law (451 B.C.)
restricting citizenship to those who could establish Athenian descent on
both sides. Thus, in the Greek democracies quite as much as in the
oligarchies, the citizens formed a _close corporation_, ruling
sometimes, as in the case of Athens in its great days, a big population
of serfs, slaves, and “outlanders.” A modern politician used to the
idea, the entirely new and different idea, that democracy in its
perfected form means that every adult man and woman shall have a voice
in the government, would, if suddenly spirited back to the extremist
Greek democracy, regard it as a kind of oligarchy. The only real
difference between a Greek “oligarchy” and a Greek democracy was that in
the former, the poorer and less important citizens had no voice in the
government, and in the latter every citizen had. Aristotle, in his
_Politics_, betrays very clearly the practical outcome of this
difference. Taxation sat lightly on the rich in the oligarchies; the
democracies, on the other hand, taxed the rich, and generally paid the
impecunious citizen a maintenance allowance and special fees. In Athens
fees were paid to citizens even for attending the general assembly. But
the generality of people outside the happy order of citizens worked and
did what they were told, and if one desired the protection of the law,
one sought a citizen to plead for one. For only the citizen had any
standing in the law courts. Greek democracy was, in fact, a sort of
government by a swarm of hereditary barristers. Our modern idea, that
any one in the state is a citizen, would have shocked the privileged
democrats of Athens profoundly.[175]