In the fifth century B.C. Athens formed a system of relationships with a
number of other Greek city states which is often spoken of by historians
as the Athenian Empire. But all the other city states retained their own
governments. One “new fact” added by the Athenian Empire was the
complete and effective suppression of piracy; another was the
institution of a sort of international law. The law, indeed, was
Athenian law; but actions could now be brought and justice administered
between citizens of the different states of the League, which of course
had not been possible before. The Athenian Empire had really developed
out of a league of mutual defence against Persia; its seat had
originally been in the island of Delos, and the allies had contributed
to a common treasure at Delos; the treasure of Delos was carried off to
Athens because it was exposed to a possible Persian raid. Then one city
after another offered a monetary contribution instead of military
service, with the result that in the end Athens was doing almost all the
work and receiving almost all the money. She was supported by one or two
of the larger islands. The “League” in this way became gradually an
“Empire,” but the citizens of the allied states remained, except where
there were special treaties of intermarriage and the like, practically
foreigners to one another. And it was chiefly the poorer citizens of
Athens who sustained this empire by their most vigorous and incessant
personal service. Every citizen was liable to military service at home
or abroad between the ages of eighteen and sixty, sometimes on purely
Athenian affairs and sometimes in defence of the cities of the Empire
whose citizens had bought themselves off. There was probably no single
man over twenty-five in the Athenian Assembly who had not served in
several campaigns in different parts of the Mediterranean or Black Sea,
and who did not expect to serve again. Modern imperialism is denounced
by its opponents as the exploitation of the world by the rich; Athenian
imperialism was the exploitation of the world by the poorer citizens of
Athens.