One natural result of this growth of a democracy of hundreds of
thousands of citizens scattered over the greater part of Italy was the
growth in power of the Senate. There had been in the development of the
Roman constitution a variety of forms of the popular assembly, the
plebeian assembly, the assembly by tribes, the assembly by centuries,
and the like, into which variety we cannot enter here with any fullness;
but the idea was established that with the popular assembly lay the
power of initiating laws. It is to be noted that there was a sort of
parallel government in this system. The assembly by tribes or by
centuries was an assembly of the _whole citizen body_, patrician and
plebeian together; the assembly of the plebeians was of course an
assembly only of the plebeian class. Each assembly had its own
officials; the former, the consuls, etc.; the latter, the tribunes.
While Rome was a little state, twenty miles square, it was possible to
assemble something like a representative gathering of the people, but it
will be manifest that with the means of communication existing in Italy
at that time, it was now impossible for the great bulk of the citizens
even to keep themselves informed of what was going on at Rome, much less
to take any effective part in political life there. Aristotle in his
_Politics_ had already pointed out the virtual disenfranchisement of
voters who lived out of the city and were preoccupied with agricultural
pursuits, and this sort of disenfranchisement by mechanical difficulties
applied to the vast majority of Roman citizens. With the growth of Rome
an unanticipated weakness crept into political life through these
causes, and the popular assembly became more and more a gathering of
political hacks and the city riffraff, and less and less a
representation of the ordinary worthy citizens. The popular assembly
came nearest to power and dignity in the fourth century B.C. From that
period it steadily declined in influence, and the new Senate, which was
no longer a patrician body, with a homogeneous and on the whole a noble
tradition, but a body of rich men, ex-magistrates, powerful officials,
bold adventurers, and the like, pervaded by a strong disposition to
return to the idea of hereditary qualification, became for three
centuries the ruling power in the Roman world.