Since the American constitution was planned, our conception of history
and our knowledge of collective psychology has undergone very
considerable development. We are beginning to see many things in the
problem of government to which the men of the eighteenth century were
blind; and, courageous as their constructive disposition was in relation
to whatever political creation had gone before, it fell far short of the
boldness which we in these days realize to be needful if this great
human problem of establishing a civilized community of will in the earth
is to be solved. They took many things for granted that now we know need
to be made the subject of the most exacting scientific study and the
most careful adjustment. They thought it was only necessary to set up
schools and colleges, with a grant of land for maintenance, and that
they might then be left to themselves. But education is not a weed that
will grow lustily in any soil, it is a necessary and delicate crop that
may easily wilt and degenerate. We learn nowadays that the
under-development of universities and educational machinery is like some
under-development of the brain and nerves, which hampers the whole
growth of the social body. By European standards, by the standard of any
state that has existed hitherto, the level of the common education of
America is high; but by the standard of what it might be, America is an
uneducated country. And those fathers of America thought also that they
had but to leave the press free, and everyone would live in the light.
They did not realize that a free press could develop a sort of
constitutional venality due to its relations with advertisers, and that
large newspaper proprietors could become buccaneers of opinion and
insensate wreckers of good beginnings. And, finally, the makers of
America had no knowledge of the complexities of vote manipulation. The
whole science of elections was beyond their ken, they knew nothing of
the need of the transferable vote to prevent the “working” of elections
by specialized organizations, and the crude and rigid methods they
adopted left their political system the certain prey of the great party
machines that have robbed American democracy of half its freedom and
most of its political soul. Politics became a trade, and a very base
trade; decent and able men, after the first great period, drifted out of
politics and attended to “business,” and what I have called elsewhere
the “sense of the state”[432] declined. Private enterprise ruled in many
matters of common concern, because political corruption made collective
enterprise impossible.