Western writers are apt, through their patriotic predispositions, to
overestimate the organization, civilizing work, and security of the
absolute monarchy that established itself in Rome after the accession of
Augustus Cæsar. From it we derive the political traditions of Britain,
France, Spain, Germany, and Italy, and these countries loom big in the
perspectives of European writers. By the scale of a world history the
Roman Empire ceases to seem so overwhelmingly important. It lasted about
four centuries in all before it was completely shattered. The Byzantine
Empire was no genuine continuation of it; it was a resumption of the
Hellenic Empire of Alexander; it spoke Greek; its monarch had a Roman
title no doubt, but so for that matter had the late Tsar of Bulgaria.
During its four centuries of life the empire of Rome had phases of
division and complete chaos; its prosperous years, if they are gathered
together and added up, do not amount in all to a couple of centuries.
Compared with the quiet steady expansion, the security, and the
civilizing task of the contemporary Chinese Empire, or with Egypt
between 4000 and 1000 B.C., orwith Sumeria before the Semitic conquest,
this amounts to a mere incident in history. The Persian Empire of
Cyrus, again, which reached from the Hellespont to the Indus, had as
high a standard of civilization; and its homelands remained unconquered
and fairly prosperous for over two hundred years. Its predecessor, the
Median Empire, had endured for half a century. After a brief submergence
by Alexander the Great, it rose again as the Seleucid Empire, which
endured for some centuries. The Seleucid dominion shrank at last to the
west of the Euphrates, and became a part of the Roman Empire; but
Persia, revived by the Parthians as a new Persian Empire, first under
the Arsacids and then under the Sassanids, outlived the empire of Rome.
The Sassanids repeatedly carried war into the Byzantine Empire, and held
the line of the Euphrates steadfastly. In 616 A.D. under Chosroes II,
they were holding Damascus, Jerusalem, and Egypt, and threatening the
Hellespont. But there has been no tradition to keep alive the glories of
the Sassanids. The reputation of Rome has flourished through the
prosperity of her heirs. The tradition of Rome is greater than its
reality.