The British and the French were at first the leading peoples in this
great proliferation of knowledge; but presently the German, who had
learnt humility under Napoleon, showed such zeal and pertinacity in
scientific inquiry as to overhaul these leaders. British science was
largely the creation of Englishmen and Scotchmen[458] working outside
the ordinary centres of erudition.[459] We have told how in England the
universities after the reformation ceased to have a wide popular appeal,
how they became the educational preserve of the nobility and gentry, and
the strongholds of the established church. A pompous and unintelligent
classical pretentiousness dominated them, and they dominated the schools
of the middle and upper classes. The only knowledge recognized was an
uncritical textual knowledge of a selection of Latin and Greek classics,
and the test of a good style was its abundance of quotations, allusions,
and stereotyped expressions. The early development of British science
went on, therefore, in spite of the formal educational organization, and
in the teeth of the bitter hostility of the teaching and clerical
professions. French education, too, was dominated by the classical
tradition of the Jesuits, and consequently it was not difficult for the
Germans to organize a body of investigators, small indeed in relation to
the possibilities of the case, but large in proportion to the little
band of British and French inventors and experimentalists. And though
this work of research and experiment was making Britain and France the
most rich and powerful countries in the world, it was not making
scientific and inventive men rich and powerful. There is a necessary
unworldliness about a sincere scientific man; he is too preoccupied with
his research to plan and scheme how to make money out of it. The
economic exploitation of his discoveries falls very easily and
naturally, therefore, into the hands of a more acquisitive type; and so
we find that the crops of rich men which every fresh phase of scientific
and technical progress has produced in Great Britain, though they have
not displayed quite the same passionate desire to insult and kill the
goose that laid the national golden eggs as the scholastic and clerical
professions, have been quite content to let that profitable creature
starve. Inventors and discoverers came by nature, they thought, for
cleverer people to profit by.