But now a new force was appearing in the Mediterranean. We have already
remarked that the Roman Empire never extended itself to the shores of
the Baltic Sea, nor had ever the vigour to push itself into Denmark. The
Nordic Aryan peoples of these neglected regions learnt much from the
empire that was unable to subdue them; as we have already noted in § 4,
they developed the art of shipbuilding and became bold seamen; they
spread across the North Sea to the west, and across the Baltic and up
the Russian rivers into the very heart of what is now Russia. One of
their earliest settlements in Russia was Novgorod the Great. There is
the same trouble and confusion for the student of history with these
northern tribes as there is with the Scythians of classical times, and
with the Hunnish Turkish peoples of Eastern and Central Asia. They
appear under a great variety of names, they change and intermingle. In
the case of Britain, for example, the Angles, the Saxons, and Jutes
conquered most of what is now England in the fifth and sixth centuries;
the Danes, a second wave of practically the same people, followed in the
eighth and ninth; and in 1013 a Danish King, Canute, reigned in England,
and not only over England, but over Denmark and Norway. For a time,
under Canute and his sons, it seemed possible that a great confederation
of the Northmen might have established itself. Then in 1066 a third wave
of the same people flowed over England from the “Norman” state in
France, where the Northmen had been settled since the days of Rolf the
Ganger (912), and where they had learnt to speak French. William, Duke
of Normandy, became the William the Conqueror (1066) of English history.
Practically, from the standpoint of universal history, all these peoples
were the same people, waves of one Nordic stock. These waves were not
only flowing westward, but eastward. Already we have noted (chap, xxix,
§ 4), a very interesting earlier movement of the same peoples under the
name of Goths from the Baltic to the Black Sea. We have traced the
splitting of these Goths into the Ostrogoths and the Visigoths, and the
adventurous wanderings that ended at last in the Ostrogoth kingdom in
Italy and the Visigoth states in Spain. In the ninth century a second
movement of the Northmen across Russia was going on at the same time
that their establishments in England and their dukedom of Normandy were
coming into existence. The populations of South Scotland, England, East
Ireland, Flanders, Normandy, and the Russias have more elements in
common than we are accustomed to recognize. All are fundamentally Gothic
and Nordic peoples. These “Russian” Norsemen travelled in the
summer-time, using the river routes that abounded in Russia; they
carried their ships by portages from the northward-running rivers to
those flowing southward. They appeared as pirates, raiders, and traders
both upon the Caspian and the Black Sea. The Arabic chroniclers note
their apparition upon the Caspian, and give them the name of Russians.
They raided Persia, and threatened Constantinople with a great fleet of
small craft (in 865, 904, 941, and 1043).[348] One of these Northmen,
Rurik (_circa_ 850), established himself as the ruler of Novgorod and
Kief, and laid the foundations of modern Russia. The fighting qualities
of the Russian Vikings were speedily appreciated at Constantinople; the
Greeks called them Varangians, and an Imperial Varangian bodyguard was
formed. After the conquest of England by the Normans (1066), a number of
Danes and English were driven into exile and joined these Russian
Varangians, apparently finding few obstacles to intercourse in their
speech and habits.