A complete account of the causes of these great climatic fluctuations
has still to be worked out, but we may perhaps point out some of the
chief of them.[13] Prominent among them is the fact that the earth does
not spin in a perfect circle round the sun. Its path or orbit is like a
hoop that is distorted; it is, roughly speaking, elliptical
(ovo-elliptical), and the sun is nearer to one end of the ellipse than
the other. It is at a point which is a focus of the ellipse. And the
shape of this orbit never remains the same. It is slowly distorted by
the attractions of the other planets, for ages it may be nearly
circular, for ages it is more or less elliptical. As the ellipse becomes
most nearly circular, then the focus becomes most nearly the centre.
When the orbit becomes most elliptical, then the position of the sun
becomes most remote from the middle or, to use the astronomer’s phrase,
most eccentric. When the orbit is most nearly circular, then it must be
manifest that all the year round the earth must be getting much the same
amount of heat from the sun; when the orbit is most distorted, then
there will be a season in each year when the earth is nearest the sun
(this phase is called _Perihelion_) and getting a great deal of heat
comparatively, and a season when it will be at its farthest from the sun
(_Aphelion_) and getting very little warmth. A planet at _aphelion_ is
travelling its slowest, and its fastest at _perihelion_; so that the hot
part of its year will last for a much less time than the cold part of
its year. (Sir Robert Ball calculated that the greatest difference
possible between the seasons was thirty-three days.) During ages when
the orbit is most nearly circular there will therefore be least extremes
of climate, and when the orbit is at its greatest eccentricity, there
will be an age of cold with great extremes of seasonal temperature.
These _changes in the orbit of the earth_ are due to the varying pull of
all the planets, and Sir Robert Ball declared himself unable to
calculate any regular cycle of orbital change, but Professor G. H.
Darwin maintained that it is possible to make out a kind of cycle
between greatest and least eccentricity of about 200,000 years.