Among the chief practitioners of Grand Monarchy outside France we may
note first the Prussian kings, Frederick William I (1713-40), and his
son and successor, Frederick II, Frederick the Great (1740-86). The
story of the slow rise of the Hohenzollern family, which ruled the
kingdom of Prussia, from inconspicuous beginnings is too tedious and
unimportant for us to follow here. It is a story of luck and violence,
of bold claims and sudden betrayals. It is told with great appreciation
in Carlyle’s _Frederick the Great_. By the eighteenth century the
Prussian kingdom was important enough to threaten the empire; it had a
strong, well-drilled army, and its king was an attentive and worthy
student of Machiavelli. Frederick the Great perfected his Versailles at
Potsdam. There the park of Sans Souci, with its fountains, avenues,
statuary, aped its model; there also was the New Palace, a vast brick
building erected at enormous expense, the Orangery in the Italian style,
with a collection of pictures, a Marble Palace, and so on. Frederick
carried culture to the pitch of authorship, and corresponded with and
entertained Voltaire, to their mutual exasperation. The Austrian
dominions were kept too busy between the hammer of the French and the
anvil of the Turks to develop the real Grand Monarch style until the
reign of Maria-Theresa (who, being a woman, did not bear the title of
Empress) (1740-80). Joseph II, who was Emperor from 1765-92, succeeded
to her palaces in 1780. With Peter the Great (1682-1725) the empire of
Muscovy broke away from her Tartar traditions and entered the sphere of
French attraction. Peter shaved the Oriental beards of his nobles and
introduced Western costume. These were but the outward and visible
symbols of his westering tendencies. To release himself from the Asiatic
feeling and traditions of Moscow, which, like Pekin, has a sacred inner
city, the Kremlin, he built himself a new capital, Petrograd, upon the
swamp of the Neva. And of course he built his Versailles, the Peterhof,
about eighteen miles from this new Paris, employing a French architect
and having a terrace, fountains, cascades, picture gallery, park, and
all the recognized features. His more distinguished successors were
Elizabeth (1741-62) and Catherine the Great, a German princess, who,
after obtaining the crown in sound Oriental fashion through the murder
of her husband, the legitimate Tsar, reverted to advanced Western ideals
and ruled with great vigour from 1762 to 1796. She set up an academy,
and corresponded with Voltaire. And she lived to witness the end of the
system of Grand Monarchy in Europe and the execution of Louis XVI.