Whatever the origin of the Japanese, there can be no doubt that their
civilization, their writing, and their literary and artistic traditions
are derived from the Chinese. They were emerging from barbarism in the
second and third century of the Christian Era, and one of their earliest
acts as a people outside their own country was an invasion of Korea
under a queen Jingo, who seems to have played a large part in
establishing their civilization. Their history is an interesting and
romantic one; they developed a feudal system and a tradition of
chivalry; their attacks upon Korea and China are an Eastern equivalent
of the English wars in France. Japan was first brought into contact with
Europe in the sixteenth century; in 1542 some Portuguese reached it in a
Chinese junk, and in 1549 a Jesuit missionary, Francis Xavier, began his
teaching there. The Jesuit accounts describe a country greatly
devastated by perpetual feudal war. For a time Japan welcomed European
intercourse, and the Christian missionaries made a great number of
converts. A certain William Adams, of Gillingham, in Kent, became the
most trusted European adviser of the Japanese, and showed them how to
build big ships. There were voyages in Japanese-built ships to India and
Peru. Then arose complicated quarrels between the Spanish Dominicans,
the Portuguese Jesuits, and the English and Dutch Protestants, each
warning the Japanese against the evil political designs of the others.
The Jesuits, in a phase of ascendancy, persecuted and insulted the
Buddhists with great acrimony. These troubles interwove with the feudal
conflicts of the time. In the end the Japanese came to the conclusion
that the Europeans and their Christianity were an intolerable nuisance,
and that Catholic Christianity in particular was a mere cloak for the
political dreams of the Pope and the Spanish monarchy--already in
possession of the Philippine Islands; there was a great and conclusive
persecution of the Christians, and in 1638 Japan was absolutely closed
to Europeans,[486] and remained closed for over 200 years. During those
two centuries the Japanese remained as completely cut off from the rest
of the world as though they lived upon another planet. It was forbidden
to build any ship larger than a mere coasting boat. No Japanese could go
abroad, and no European enter the country.