The very success and early prosperity and general contentment of China
in the past must have worked to justify in that land all the natural
self-complacency and conservatism of mankind. No animal will change when
its conditions are “good enough” for present survival. And in this
matter man is still an animal. Until the nineteenth century, for more
than two thousand years, there was little in the history of China that
could cause any serious doubts in the mind of a Chinaman of the general
superiority of his own civilization to that of the rest of the world,
and there was no reason apparent therefore for any alteration. China
produced a profusion of beautiful art, some delightful poetry,
astonishing cookery, and thousands of millions of glowingly pleasant
lives generation after generation. Her ships followed her marvellous
inland waterways, and put to sea but rarely, and then only to India or
Borneo as their utmost adventure. (Until the sixteenth century we must
remember European seamen never sailed out into the Atlantic Ocean. The
Norse discovery of America, the Phœnician circumnavigation of Africa,
were exceptional feats.) And these things were attained without any such
general boredom, servitude, indignity, and misery as underlay the rule
of the rich in the Roman Empire. There was much poverty, much
discontent, but it was not massed poverty, it was not a necessary
popular discontent. For a thousand years the Chinese system, though it
creaked and swayed at times, seemed proof against decay. Dynastic
changes there were, rebellions, phases of disorder, famines,
pestilences; two great invasions that set foreign dynasties upon the
throne of the Son of Heaven, but no such shock as to revolutionize the
order of the daily round. The emperors and dynasties might come and go;
the mandarins, the examinations, the classics, and the traditions and
habitual life remained. China’s civilization had already reached its
culmination in the seventh century A.D., its crowning period was the
Tang period; and though it continued to spread slowly and steadily into
Annam, into Cambodia, into Siam, into Tibet, into Nepal, Korea,
Mongolia, and Manchuria, there is henceforth little more than such
geographical progress to record of it in this history for a thousand
years.[315]