But though war was dreaded as it had never been dreaded in the world
before, nothing was done in the way of setting up a federal control to
prevent human affairs drifting towards war. In 1898, it is true, the
young Tsar Nicholas II (1894-1917) issued a rescript inviting the other
Great Powers to a conference of states “seeking to make the great idea
of universal peace triumph over the elements of trouble and discord.”
His rescript recalls the declaration of his predecessor, Alexander I,
which gave its tone to the Holy Alliance, and it is vitiated by the same
assumption that peace can be established between sovereign governments
rather than by a broad appeal to the needs and rights of the one people
of mankind. The lesson of the United States of America, which showed
that there could be neither unity of action nor peace until the thought
of the “people of Virginia” and the “people of Massachusetts” had been
swept aside by the thought of the “people of the United States,” went
entirely disregarded in the European attempts at pacification. Two
conferences were held at The Hague in Holland, one in 1899 and another
in 1907, and at the second nearly all the sovereign states of the world
were represented. They were represented diplomatically, there was no
direction of the general intelligence of the world to their
deliberations, the ordinary common man did not even know that these
conferences were sitting, and for the most part the assembled
representatives haggled cunningly upon points of international law
affecting war, leaving aside the abolition of war as a chimæra. These
Hague Conferences did nothing to dispel the idea that international life
is necessarily competitive. They accepted that idea. They did nothing to
develop the consciousness of a world commonweal overriding sovereigns
and foreign offices. The international lawyers and statesmen who
attended these gatherings were as little disposed to hasten on a world
commonweal on such a basis as were the Prussian statesmen of 1848 to
welcome an all-German parliament overriding the rights and “policy” of
the King of Prussia.