Through Charlemagne the tradition of the Roman Cæsar was revived in
Europe.[339] The Roman Empire was dead and decaying; the Byzantine
Empire was far gone in decay; but the education and mentality of Europe
had sunken to a level at which new creative political ideas were
probably impossible. In all Europe there survived not a tithe of the
speculative vigour that we find in the Athenian literature of the fifth
century B.C. There was no power to postulate a new occasion or to
conceive and organize a novel political method. Official Christianity
had long overlaid and accustomed itself to ignore those strange
teachings of Jesus of Nazareth from which it had arisen. The Roman
Church, clinging tenaciously to its possession of the title of _pontifex
maximus_, had long since abandoned its appointed task of achieving the
Kingdom of Heaven. It was preoccupied with the revival of Roman
ascendancy on earth, which it conceived of as its inheritance. It had
become a political body, using the faith and needs of simple men to
forward its schemes. Europe drifted towards a dreary imitation and
revival of the misconceived failures of the past. For eleven centuries
from Charlemagne onwards, “Emperors” and “Cæsars” of this line and that
come and go in the history of Europe like fancies in a disordered mind.
We shall have to tell of a great process of mental growth in Europe, of
enlarged horizons and accumulating power, but it was a process that went
on independently of, and in spite of, the political forms of the time,
until at last it shattered those forms altogether. Europe during those
eleven centuries of the imitation Cæsars which began with Charlemagne,
and which closed only in the monstrous bloodshed of 1914-1918, has been
like a busy factory owned by a somnambulist, who is sometimes quite
unimportant and sometimes disastrously in the way. Or rather than a
somnambulist, let us say by a corpse that magically simulates a kind of
life. The Roman Empire staggers, sprawls, is thrust off the stage, and
reappears, and--if we may carry the image one step further--it is the
Church of Rome which plays the part of the magician and keeps this
corpse alive.