It is curious to note how slowly the mechanism of the intellectual life
improves. Contrast the ordinary library facilities of a middle-class
English home, such as the present writer is now working in, with the
inconveniences and deficiencies of the equipment of an Alexandrian
writer, and one realizes the enormous waste of time, physical
exertion, and attention that went on through all the centuries during
which that library flourished. Before the present writer lie half a
dozen books, and there are good indices to three of them. He can pick up
any one of these six books, refer quickly to a statement, verify a
quotation, and go on writing. Contrast with that the tedious unfolding
of a rolled manuscript. Close at hand are two encyclopædias, a
dictionary, an atlas of the world, a biographical dictionary, and other
books of reference. They have no marginal indices, it is true; but that
perhaps is asking for too much at present. There were no such resources
in the world in 300 B.C. Alexandria had still to produce the first
grammar and the first dictionary. This present book is being written in
manuscript; it is then taken by a typist and typewritten very
accurately. It can then, with the utmost convenience, be read over,
corrected amply, rearranged freely, retyped, and recorrected. The
Alexandrian author had to dictate or recopy every word he wrote. Before
he could turn back to what he had written previously, he had to dry his
last words by waving them in the air or pouring sand over them; he had
not even blotting-paper. Whatever an author wrote had to be recopied
again and again before it could reach any considerable circle of
readers, and every copyist introduced some new error.[206] Whenever a
need for maps or diagrams arose, there were fresh difficulties. Such a
science as anatomy, for example, depending as it does upon accurate
drawing, must have been enormously hampered by the natural limitations
of the copyist. The transmission of geographical fact again must have
been almost incredibly tedious. No doubt a day will come when a private
library and writing-desk of the year A.D. 1919 will seem quaintly clumsy
and difficult; but, measured by the standards of Alexandria, they are
astonishingly quick, efficient, and economical of nervous and mental
energy.