It was not only in America that the French and British powers clashed.
The condition of India at this time was one very interesting and
attractive to European adventurers. The great Mongol Empire of Baber,
Akbar, and Aurangzeb was now far gone in decay. What had happened to
India was very parallel to what had happened to Germany. The Great Mogul
at Delhi in India, like the Holy Roman Emperor in Germany, was still
legally overlord, but after the death of Aurangzeb he exerted only a
nominal authority except in the immediate neighbourhood of his capital.
In the southwest a Hindu people, the Mahrattas, had risen against Islam,
restored Brahminism as the ruling religion, and for a time extended
their power over the whole southern triangle of India. In Rajputana also
the rule of Islam was replaced by Brahminism, and at Bhurtpur and Jaipur
there ruled powerful Rajput princes. In Oudh there was a Shiite kingdom,
with its capital at Lucknow, and Bengal was also a separate (Moslem)
kingdom. Away in the Punjab to the north had arisen a very interesting
religious body, the Sikhs, proclaiming the universal rule of one God and
assailing both the Hindu Vedas and the Moslem Koran. Originally a
pacific sect, the Sikhs presently followed the example of Islam, and
sought--at first very disastrously to themselves--to establish the
kingdom of God by the sword. And into this confused and disordered India
there presently (1738) came an invader from the north, Nadir Shah
(1736-47), the Turcoman ruler of Persia, who swept down through the
Khyber pass, broke every army that stood in his way, and captured and
sacked Delhi, carrying off an enormous booty. He left the north of India
so utterly broken, that in the next twenty years there were no less than
six other successful plundering raids into North India from Afghanistan,
which had become an independent state at the death of Nadir Shah. For a
time Mahrattas fought with Afghans for the rule of North India; then the
Mahratta power broke up into a series of principalities, Indore,
Gwalior, Baroda, and others....