Meanwhile on the eastern front, after a swift initial success which gave
them Hira, the Persian resistance stiffened. The dynastic struggle had
ended at last in the coming of a king of kings, and a general of ability
had been found in Rustam. He gave battle at Kadessia (637). His army was
just such another composite host as Darius had led into Thrace or
Alexander defeated at Issus; it was a medley of levies. He had
thirty-three war elephants, and he sat on a golden throne upon a raised
platform behind the Persian ranks, surveying the battle, which throne
will remind the reader of Herodotus, the Hellespont, and Salamis more
than a thousand years before. The battle lasted three days; each day the
Arabs attacked and the Persian host held its ground until nightfall
called a truce. On the third day the Arabs received reinforcements, and
towards the evening the Persians attempted to bring the struggle to an
end by a charge of elephants. At first the huge beasts carried all
before them; then one was wounded painfully and became uncontrollable,
rushing up and down between the armies. Its panic affected the others,
and for a time both armies remained dumbfounded in the red light of
sunset, watching the frantic efforts of these grey, squealing monsters
to escape from the tormenting masses of armed men that hemmed them in.
It was by the merest chance that at last they broke through the Persian
and not through the Arab array, and that it was the Arabs who were able
to charge home upon the resulting confusion. The twilight darkened to
night, but this time the armies did not separate. All through the night
the Arabs smote in the name of Allah, and pressed upon the shattered and
retreating Persians. Dawn broke upon the vestiges of Rustam’s army in
flight far beyond the litter of the battlefield. Its path was marked by
scattered weapons and war material, abandoned transport, and the dead
and dying. The platform and the golden throne were broken down, and
Rustam lay dead among a heap of dead men....