The psychology of nations is still but a rudimentary science.
Psychologists have scarcely begun to study the citizen side of the
individual man. But it is of the utmost importance to our subject that
the student of universal history should give some thought to the mental
growth of the generations of Germans educated since the victories of
1871. They were naturally inflated by their sweeping unqualified
successes in war, and by their rapid progress from comparative poverty
to wealth. It would have been more than human in them if they had not
given way to some excesses of patriotic vanity. But this reaction was
deliberately seized upon and fostered and developed by a systematic
exploitation and control of school and college, literature and press, in
the interests of the Hohenzollern dynasty. A teacher, a professor, who
did not teach and preach, in and out of season, the racial, moral,
intellectual, and physical superiority of the Germans to all other
peoples, their extraordinary devotion to war and their dynasty, and
their inevitable destiny under that dynasty to lead the world, was a
marked man, doomed to failure and obscurity.[490] German historical
teaching became an immense systematic falsification of the human past,
with a view to the Hohenzollern future. All other nations were
represented as incompetent and decadent; the Prussians were the leaders
and regenerators of mankind. The young German read this in his
school-books, heard it in church, found it in his literature, had it
poured into him with passionate conviction by his professor. It was
poured into him by all his professors; Hueffer (_op. cit._) says that
lectures in biology or mathematics would break off from their proper
subject to indulge in long passages of royalist patriotic rant. Only
minds of extraordinary toughness and originality could resist such a
torrent of suggestion. Insensibly there was built up in the German mind
a conception of Germany and its emperor as of something splendid and
predominant as nothing else had ever been before, a godlike nation in
“shining armour” brandishing the “good German sword” in a world of
inferior--and very badly disposed--peoples. We have told our story of
Europe; the reader may judge whether the glitter of the German sword is
exceptionally blinding. Germania was deliberately intoxicated, she was
systematically kept drunk, with this sort of patriotic rhetoric. It is
the greatest of the Hohenzollern crimes that the Crown constantly and
persistently tampered with education, and particularly with historical
teaching. No other modern state has so sinned against education. The
oligarchy of the crowned republic of Great Britain may have crippled and
starved education, but the Hohenzollern monarchy corrupted and
prostituted it.