It was from these distresses that the peasant wars of the fourteenth
century sprang. There was a great shortage of labour and a great
shortage of goods, and the rich abbots and monastic cultivators who
owned so much of the land, and the nobles and rich merchants, were too
ignorant of economic laws to understand that they must not press upon
the toilers in this time of general distress. They saw their property
deteriorating, their lands going out of cultivation, and they made
violent statutes to compel men to work without any rise in wages, and to
prevent their straying in search of better employment. Naturally enough
this provoked “a new revolt against the whole system of social
inequality which had till then passed unquestioned as the divine order
of the world. The cry of the poor found a terrible utterance in the
words of ‘a mad priest of Kent,’ as the courtly Froissart calls him, who
for twenty years (1360-1381) found audience for his sermons, in defiance
of interdict and imprisonment, in the stout yeomen who gathered in the
Kentish churchyards. ‘Mad,’ as the landowners called him, it was in the
preaching of John Ball that England first listened to a declaration of
natural equality and the rights of man. ‘Good people,’ cried the
preacher, ‘things will never go well in England so long as goods be not
in common, and so long as there be villeins and gentlemen. By what right
are they whom we call lords greater folk than we? On what grounds have
they deserved it? Why do they hold us in serfage? If we all came of the
same father and mother, of Adam and Eve, how can they say or prove that
they are better than we, if it be not that they make us gain for them by
our toil what they spend in their pride? They are clothed in velvet and
warm in their furs and their ermines, while we are covered with rags.
They have wine and spices and fair bread; and we oat-cake and straw, and
water to drink. They have leisure and fine houses; we have pain and
labour, the rain and the wind in the fields. And yet it is of us and of
our toil that these men hold their state.’ A spirit fatal to the whole
system of the Middle Ages breathed in the popular rhyme which condensed
the levelling doctrine of John Ball: ‘When Adam delved and Eve span, who
was then the gentleman?’”[379]