Octavian seems to have been almost entirely free from the divine
aspirations of Julius Cæsar and Antony. He was neither God nor romantic
hero; he was a man. He was a man of far greater breadth and capacity
than any other player in this last act of the Republican drama in Rome.
All things considered, he was perhaps the best thing that could have
happened to Rome at that time. He “voluntarily resigned the
extraordinary powers which he had held since 43, and, to quote his own
words, ‘handed over the republic to the control of the Senate and the
people of Rome.’ The old constitutional machinery was once more set in
motion; the Senate, assembly, and magistrates resumed their functions,
and Octavian himself was hailed as the ‘restorer of the commonwealth and
the champion of freedom.’ It was not so easy to determine what relation
he himself, the actual master of the Roman world, should occupy towards
this revived republic. His abdication, in any real sense of the word,
would have simply thrown everything back into confusion. The interests
of peace and order required that he should retain at least the
substantial part of his authority; and this object was in fact
accomplished, and the rule of the emperors founded, in a manner which
has no parallel in history. Any revival of the kingly title was out of
the question, and Octavian himself expressly refused the dictatorship.
Nor was any new office created or any new official title invented for
his benefit. But by Senate and people he was invested according to the
old constitutional forms with certain powers, as many citizens had been
before him, and so took his place by the side of the lawfully appointed
magistrates of the republic; only, to mark his pre-eminent dignity, as
the first of them all, the Senate decreed that he should take as an
additional cognomen that of ‘Augustus,’ while in common parlance he was
henceforth styled Princeps, a simple title of courtesy, familiar to
republican usage and conveying no other idea than that of a recognized
primacy and precedence over his fellow-citizens. The ideal sketched by
Cicero in his _De Republica_, of a constitutional president of a free
republic, was apparently realized; but it was only in appearance. For in
fact the special prerogatives conferred upon Octavian gave him back in
substance the autocratic authority he had resigned, and as between the
restored republic and its new _princeps_ the balance of power was
overwhelmingly on the side of the latter.”[255]