And, secondly, there has hitherto existed in the States no organization
for and no tradition of what one may call non-assimilable possessions.
Where there is no crown there cannot be crown colonies. In spreading
across the American continent, the United States had developed a quite
distinctive method of dealing with new territories, admirably adapted
for unsettled lands, but very inconvenient if applied too freely to
areas already containing an alien population. This method was based on
the idea that there cannot be in the United States system a permanently
subject people. The first stage of the ordinary process of assimilation
had been the creation of a “territory” under the federal government,
having a considerable measure of self-government, sending a delegate
(who could not vote) to congress, and destined, in the natural course of
things, as the country became settled and population increased, to
flower at last into full statehood. This had been the process of
development of all the latter states of the Union; the latest
territories to become states being Arizona and New Mexico in 1910. The
frozen wilderness of Alaska, bought from Russia, remained politically
undeveloped simply because it had an insufficient population for state
organization. As the annexations of Germany and Great Britain in the
Pacific threatened to deprive the United States navy of coaling stations
in that ocean, a part of the Samoan Islands (1889) and the Sandwich
Islands (Hawaii) were annexed (1898). Here for the first time the United
States had real subject populations to deal with. But in the absence of
any class comparable to the Anglo-Indian officials who sway British
opinion, the American procedure followed the territorial method. Every
effort was made to bring the educational standards of Hawaii up to the
American level, and a domestic legislature on the territorial pattern
was organized so that these dusky islanders seem destined ultimately to
obtain full United States citizenship. (The small Samoan Islands are
taken care of by a United States naval administrator.)