Closely connected with the vagueness of men’s ideas about property was
the vagueness of their ideas about currency. Both the American and the
French republics fell into serious trouble upon this score. Here, again,
we deal with something that is not simple, a tangle of usages,
conventions, laws, and prevalent mental habits, out of which arise
problems which admit of no solution in simple terms, and which yet are
of vital importance to the everyday life of the community. The validity
of the acknowledgement a man is given for a day’s work is manifestly of
quite primary importance to the working of the social machine. The
growth of confidence in the precious metals and of coins, until the
assurance became practically universal that good money could be trusted
to have its purchasing power anywhere, must have been a gradual one in
human history. And being fairly established, this assurance was
subjected to very considerable strains and perplexities by the action of
governments in debasing currency and in substituting paper promises to
pay for the actual metallic coins. Every age produced a number of clever
people intelligent enough to realize the opportunities for smart
operations afforded by the complex of faiths and fictions upon which the
money system rested, and sufficiently unsound morally to give their best
energies to growing rich and so getting people to work for them, through
tricks and tampering with gold, coinage, and credit. So soon as serious
political and social dislocation occurred, the money mechanism began to
work stiffly and inaccurately. The United States and the French Republic
both started their careers in a phase of financial difficulty.
Everywhere governments had been borrowing and issuing paper promises to
pay interest, more interest than they could conveniently raise. Both
revolutions led to much desperate public spending and borrowing, and at
the same time to an interruption of cultivation and production that
further diminished real taxable wealth. Both governments, being unable
to pay their way in gold, resorted to the issue of paper money,
promising to pay upon the security of undeveloped land (in America) or
recently confiscated church lands (France). In both cases the amount of
issue went far beyond the confidence of men in the new security. Gold
was called in, hidden by the cunning ones, or went abroad to pay for
imports; and people found themselves with various sorts of bills and
notes in the place of coins, all of uncertain and diminishing value.