“But Fabius, on this occasion, filled the city with alarms, as if the
commonwealth was going to be brought into the most extreme danger by a
rash and indiscreet young man; in short, he scrupled not to do or say
anything he thought likely to dissuade his countrymen from embracing the
proposal. With the Senate he carried his point. But the people believed
that his opposition to Scipio proceeded either from envy of his success,
or from a secret fear that if this young hero should perform some signal
exploit, put an end to the war, or even remove it out of Italy, his own
slow proceedings through the course of so many years might be imputed to
indolence or timidity.... He applied to Crassus, the colleague of
Scipio, and endeavoured to persuade him not to yield that province to
Scipio, but, if he thought it proper to conduct the war in that manner,
to go himself against Carthage. Nay, he even hindered the raising of
money for that expedition, so that Scipio was obliged to find the
supplies as he could.... He endeavoured to prevent the young men who
offered to go as volunteers from giving in their names, and loudly
declared, both in the Senate and Forum, ‘That Scipio did not only
himself avoid Hannibal, but intended to carry away with him the
remaining strength of Italy, persuading the young men to abandon their
parents, their wives, and native city, while an unsubdued and potent
enemy was still at their doors.’ With these assertions he so terrified
the people, that they allowed Scipio to take with him only the legions
that were in Sicily, and three hundred of those men who had served him
with so much fidelity in Spain.... After Scipio was gone over into
Africa, an account was soon brought to Rome of his glorious and
wonderful achievements. This account was followed by rich spoils, which
confirmed it. A Numidian king was taken prisoner; two camps were burned
and destroyed; and in them a vast number of men, arms, and horses; and
the Carthaginians sent orders to Hannibal to quit his fruitless hopes in
Italy, and return home to defend his own country. Whilst every tongue
was applauding these exploits of Scipio, Fabius proposed that his
successor should be appointed, without any shadow of reason for it,
except what this well-known maxim implies: viz., ‘That it is dangerous
to trust affairs of such importance to the fortune of one man, because
it is not likely that he will be always successful.’ ... Nay, even when
Hannibal embarked his army and quitted Italy, Fabius ceased not to
disturb the general joy and to damp the spirits of Rome, for he took the
liberty to affirm, ‘That the commonwealth was now come to her last and
worst trial; that she had the most reason to dread the efforts of
Hannibal when he should arrive in Africa, and attack her sons under the
walls of Carthage; that Scipio would have to do with an army yet warm
with the blood of so many Roman generals, dictators, and consuls.’ The
city was alarmed with these declamations, and though the war was removed
into Africa, the danger seemed to approach nearer Rome than ever.”