In the earlier years of the war there was a very widespread feeling of
brotherhood and the common interest in all the belligerent states. The
common men were everywhere sacrificing life and health for what they
believed to be the common good of the state. In return, it was promised,
there would be less social injustice after the war, a more universal
devotion to the common welfare. In Great Britain, for instance, Mr.
Lloyd George was particularly insistent upon his intention to make the
after-war Britain “a land fit for heroes.” He foreshadowed the
continuation of this new war communism into the peace period in
discourses of great fire and beauty. In Great Britain there was created
a Ministry of Reconstruction, which was understood to be planning a new
and more generous social order, better labour conditions, better
housing, extended education, a complete and scientific revision of the
economic system. Similar hopes of a better world sustained the common
soldiers of France and Germany and Italy. It was premature
disillusionment that caused the Russian collapse. So that two mutually
dangerous streams of anticipation were running through the minds of men
in Western Europe towards the end of the war. The rich and adventurous
men, and particularly the new war profiteers, were making their plans to
prevent such developments as that air transport should become a state
property, and to snatch back manufactures, shipping, land transport, the
public services generally, and the trade in staples from the hands of
the commonweal into the grip of private profit; they were securing
possession of newspapers and busying themselves with party caucuses and
the like to that end; while the masses of common men were looking
forward naïvely to a new state of society planned almost entirely in
their interest and according to generous general ideas. The history of
1919 is largely the clash of these two streams of anticipation. There
was a hasty selling off, by the “business” government in control, of
every remunerative public enterprise to private speculators.... By the
middle of 1919 the labour masses throughout the world were manifestly
disappointed and in a thoroughly bad temper. The British “Ministry of
Reconstruction” and its foreign equivalents were exposed as a soothing
sham. The common man felt he had been cheated. There was to be no
reconstruction, but only a restoration of the old order--in the harsher
form necessitated by the poverty of the new time.