Such were the uneasy swayings of the peace of the Congress of Vienna,
which were provoked by the reactionary proceedings to which, sooner or
later, all monarchist courts seem by their very nature to gravitate. The
stresses that arose from the unscientific map-making of the diplomatists
gathered force more deliberately, but they were even more dangerous to
the peace of mankind. It is extraordinarily inconvenient to administer
together the affairs of peoples speaking different languages and so
reading different literatures and having different general ideas,
especially if those differences are exacerbated by religious disputes.
Only some strong mutual interest, such as the common defensive needs of
the Swiss mountaineers, can justify a close linking of peoples of
dissimilar languages and faiths; and even in Switzerland there is the
utmost local autonomy. Ultimately, when the Great Power tradition is
certainly dead and buried, those Swiss populations may gravitate towards
their natural affinities in Germany, France, and Italy. When, as in
Macedonia, populations are mixed in a patchwork of villages and
districts, the cantonal system is imperatively needed. But if the reader
will look at the map of Europe as the Congress of Vienna drew it, he
will see that this gathering seems almost as if it had planned the
maximum of local exasperation. It destroyed the Dutch Republic, quite
needlessly, it lumped together the Protestant Dutch with the
French-speaking Catholics of the old Spanish (Austrian) Netherlands, and
set up a kingdom of the Netherlands. It handed over not merely the old
republic of Venice, but all of North Italy as far as Milan to the
German-speaking Austrians. French-speaking Savoy it combined with pieces
of Italy to restore the kingdom of Sardinia.[456] Austria and Hungary,
already a sufficiently explosive mixture of discordant nationalities,
Germans, Hungarians, Czecho-Slovaks, Jugo-Slavs, Roumanians, and now
Italians, was made still more impossible by confirming Austria’s Polish
acquisitions of 1772 and 1795. The Polish people, being catholic and
republican-spirited, were chiefly given over to the less civilized rule
of the Greek-orthodox Tsar, but important districts went to Protestant
Russia. The Tsar was also confirmed in his acquisition of the entirely
alien Finns. The very dissimilar Norwegian and Swedish peoples were
bound together under one king. Germany, the reader will see, was left
in a particularly dangerous state of muddle. Prussia and Austria were
both partly in and partly out of a German confederation, which included
a multitude of minor states. The King of Denmark came into the German
confederation by virtue of certain German-speaking possessions in
Holstein. Luxembourg was included in the German Confederation, though
its ruler was also King of the Netherlands, and though many of its
peoples talked French. Here was a crazy tangle, an outrage on the common
sense of mankind, a preposterous disregard of the fact that the people
who talk German and base their ideas on German literature, the people
who talk Italian and base their ideas on Italian literature, and the
people who talk Polish and base their ideas on Polish literature, will
all be far better off and most helpful and least obnoxious to the rest
of mankind if they conduct their own affairs in their own idiom within
the ring-fence of their own speech. Is it any wonder that one of the
most popular songs in Germany during this period declared that wherever
the German tongue was spoken, there was the German Fatherland?