He married two wives after the death of Kadija, one being the young
Ayesha, who became and remained his favourite and most influential
partner; and subsequently a number of other women, wives and concubines,
were added to his establishment. This led to much trouble and confusion,
and in spite of many special and very helpful revelations on the part of
Allah, these complications still require much explanation and argument
from the faithful. There was, for example, a scandal about Ayesha; she
was left behind on one occasion when the howdah and the camel went on,
while she was looking for her necklace among the bushes; and so Allah
had to intervene with some heat and denounce her slanderers. Allah also
had to speak very plainly about the general craving among this household
of women for “this world’s life and its ornature” and for “finery.” Then
there was much discussion because the Prophet first married his young
cousin Zainib to his adopted son Zaid, and afterwards, “when Zaid had
accomplished his want of her,” the Prophet took her and married
her--but, as the inspired book makes clear, only in order to show the
difference between an adopted and a real son. “We gave her to you as a
wife, so that there should be no difficulty for the believers in respect
of the wives of their adopted sons, when they have accomplished their
want of them, and Allah’s command shall be performed.” Yet surely a
simple statement in the Koran should have sufficed without this
excessively practical demonstration. There was, moreover, a mutiny in
the harem on account of the undue favours shown by the Prophet to an
Egyptian concubine who had borne him a boy, a boy for whom he had a
great affection, since none of Kadija’s sons had survived. These
domestic troubles mingle inextricably with our impression of the
Prophet’s personality. One of his wives was a Jewess, Safiyya, whom he
had married on the evening of the battle in which her husband had been
captured and executed. He viewed the captured women at the end of the
day, and she found favour in his eyes and was taken to his tent.