[161] So this name should be spelt in English. It is now the fashion
among the learned and among the sceptical to spell it Yahwe or Jahveh or
Jahve, or in some such fashion. There is a justification for this in the
fact that at first only the consonants were written in Hebrew, and then,
for reasons into which we will not enter here, the wrong vowels were
inserted in this name. But ever since the days of Tyndale’s Bible,
Jehovah has been established in English literature as the name of the
God of Israel, and it is not to be lightly altered. There is at present
a deplorable tendency to strange spelling among historians. Attention
has already been called to the confusion that is being accumulated in
people’s minds by the variable spelling of Egyptologists, but the
tendency is now almost universal among historical writers. In an
otherwise admirable little book, _The Opening-up of Africa_, by Sir H.
H. Johnston, for example, one finds him spelling Saul as Sha’ul and
Solomon as Shelomoh; Jerusalem becomes Yerusalim and the Hebrews, Habiru
or Ibrim. Historians do not realize how the mind of the general reader
is distressed and discouraged by these constantly fluctuating attempts
to achieve phonetic exactitude. This treatment of old forms has much the
same effect as the dazzle-painting of ships that went on during the
submarine warfare. It is dazzle-spelling. The ordinary educated man is
so confused that he fails altogether to recognize even his oldest
friends under their modern disguises. He loses his way in the story
hopelessly. The old events occur to novel names in unfamiliar places. He
conceives a disgust for history in which no record seems to tally with
any other record. Still more maddening and confusing is the variable
spelling of Chinese names. A large part of the popular indifference to
Chinese history may be due to the impossibility of holding on to the
thread of a story in which one narrator talks of T’sin and another of
Sin, and both forms mix themselves with Chin and T’chin. A boldly
Europeanized name, such as Confucius, is far more readily grasped.
Modern writers in their zeal for phonetics seem to have lost their sense
of proportion. It is of far more importance not merely to civilization,
but to the welfare, respect, and endowment of historians, that the
general community should form clear and sound ideas of historical
processes, than that it should pronounce the name Jehovah exactly as
this or that learned gentleman believes it was pronounced by the Hebrews
of the days of Ezra. A day may come in the future for one final,
conclusive reform in the spelling of historical names. Meanwhile, it
will probably save school teachers of history from endless confusion and
muddle if they adhere firmly to the time-established spelling. Yet we
have attempted no pedantic classicalism. The reader will find
Peisistratus for Goldsmith’s Pisistratus, the Arabic spelling of
Muhammad, Kelt for Celt, and Habsburg taking the place of the older
Hapsburg.