The prolongation of the war, and the fact that it was not fought along a
determined frontier, but all over an empire of patches, Protestant here,
Catholic there, made it one of the most cruel and destructive that
Europe had known since the days of the barbarian raids. Its peculiar
mischief lay not in the fighting, but in the concomitants of the
fighting. It came at a time when military tactics had developed to a
point that rendered ordinary levies useless against trained professional
infantry. Volley firing with muskets at a range of a few score yards had
abolished the individualistic knight in armour, but the charge of
disciplined masses of cavalry could still disperse any infantry that had
not been drilled into a mechanical rigidity. The infantry with their
muzzle-loading muskets could not keep up a steady enough fire to wither
determined cavalry before it charged home. They had, therefore, to meet
the shock standing or kneeling behind a bristling wall of pikes or
bayonets. For this they needed great discipline and experience. Iron
cannon were still of small size and not very abundant, and they did not
play a decisive part as yet in warfare. They could “plough lanes” in
infantry, but they could not easily smash and scatter it if it was
sturdy and well drilled. War under these conditions was entirely in the
hands of seasoned professional soldiers, and the question of their pay
was as important a one to the generals of that time as the question of
food or munitions. As the long struggle dragged on from phase to phase,
and the financial distress of the land increased, the commanders of both
sides were forced to fall back upon the looting of towns and villages,
both for supply and to make up the arrears of their soldiers’ pay. The
soldiers became, therefore, more and more mere brigands living on the
country, and the Thirty Years’ War set up a tradition of looting as a
legitimate operation in warfare and of outrage as a soldiers’ privilege
that has tainted the good name of Germany right down to the Great War of
1914. The earlier chapters of Defoe’s _Memoirs of a Cavalier_, with its
vivid description of the massacre and burning of Magdeburg, will give
the reader a far better idea of the warfare of this time than any formal
history. So harried was the land that the farmers ceased from
cultivation, what snatch crops could be harvested were hidden away, and
great crowds of starving women and children became camp followers of the
armies, and supplied a thievish tail to the rougher plundering. At the
close of the struggle all Germany was ruined and desolate. Central
Europe did not fully recover from these robberies and devastations for a
century.