The Latin language had not the intellectual vigour behind it, it had not
the literature and the science, to make it a necessity to intelligent
men and so to maintain an ascendancy over the Greek. For no language,
whatever officialdom may do, can impose itself in competition with
another that can offer the advantages of a great literature or
encyclopædic information. Aggressive languages must bring gifts, and the
gifts of Greek were incomparably greater than the gifts of Latin. The
Eastern empire was from the beginnings of its separation Greek-speaking,
and a continuation, though a degenerate continuation, of the Hellenic
tradition. Its intellectual centre was no longer in Greece, but
Alexandria. Its mentality was no longer the mentality of free-minded
plain-speaking citizens, of the Stagirite Aristotle and the Greek Plato;
its mentality was the mentality of the pedants and of men politically
impotent; its philosophy was a pompous evasion of real things, and its
scientific impulse was dead. Nevertheless, it was Hellenic. The Roman
had come, and he had gone again. Indeed he had gone very extensively
from the west also. By the sixth century A.D. the populations of Europe
and North Africa had been stirred up like sediment. When presently in
the seventh and eighth centuries the sediment begins to settle down
again and populations begin to take on a definite localized character,
the Roman is only to be found by name in the region about Rome. Over
large parts of his Western empire we find changed and changing
modifications of his Latin speech; in Gaul, where the Frank is learning
a Gallic form of Latin and evolving French in the process; in Italy,
where, under the influence of Teutonic invaders, the Lombards and Goths,
Latin is being modified into various Italian dialects; in Spain and
Portugal, where it is becoming Spanish and Portuguese. The fundamental
Latinity of the languages in these regions serves to remind us of the
numerical unimportance of the various Frankish, Vandal, Avar, Gothic,
and the like German-speaking invaders, and serves to justify our
statement that what happened to the Western empire was not so much
conquest and the replacement of one population by another as a political
and social revolution. The district of Valais in South Switzerland also
retained a fundamentally Latin speech and so did the Canton Grisons;
and, what is more curious and interesting, is that in Dacia and Mœsia
Inferior, large parts of which to the north of the Danube became the
modern Roumania (= Romania), although these regions were added late to
the empire and lost soon, the Latin speech also remained.