And even if the observer came down to a closer scrutiny, there would
still be much accumulated improvement to note. There had been a
softening of manners and a general refinement since the days of Julius
Cæsar. With this there had been a real increase of humane feeling.
During the period of the Antonines, laws for the protection of slaves
from extreme cruelty came into existence, and it was no longer
permissible to sell them to the gladiatorial schools. Not only were the
cities outwardly more splendidly built, but within the homes of the
wealthy there had been great advances in the art of decoration. The
gross feasting, animal indulgence, and vulgar display of the earlier
days of Roman prosperity were now tempered by a certain refinement.
Dress had become richer, finer, and more beautiful. There was a great
trade in silk with remote China, for the mulberry tree and the silkworm
had not yet begun to move west. By the time silk had ended its long and
varied journey to Rome it was worth its weight in gold. Yet it was used
abundantly, and there was a steady flow of the precious metals eastward
in exchange. There had been very considerable advances in gastronomy and
the arts of entertainment. Petronius describes a feast given by a
wealthy man under the early Cæsars, a remarkable succession of courses,
some delicious, some amazing, exceeding anything that even the
splendours and imagination of modern New York could produce; and the
festival was varied by music and by displays of tight-rope dancing,
juggling, Homeric recitations, and the like. There was a considerable
amount of what we may describe as “rich men’s culture” throughout the
empire. Books were far more plentiful than they had been before the time
of the Cæsars. Men prided themselves upon their libraries, even when the
cares and responsibilities of property made them too busy to give their
literary treasures much more than a passing examination. The knowledge
of Greek spread eastward and of Latin westward, and if the prominent men
of this or that British or Gallic city lacked any profound Greek culture
themselves, they could always turn to some slave or other, whose
learning had been guaranteed of the highest quality by the slave-dealer,
to supply the deficiency.