Moreover, the foreign offices of the British, the French, and the
Italians were haunted by traditional schemes of aggression entirely
incompatible with the new ideas. A League of Nations that is to be of
any appreciable value to mankind must supersede imperialisms; it is
either a super-imperialism, a liberal world-empire of united states,
participant or in tutelage, or it is nothing; but few of the people at
the Paris Conference had the mental vigour even to assert this obvious
consequence of the League proposal. They wanted to be at the same time
bound and free, to ensure peace for ever, but to keep their weapons in
their hands. Accordingly the old annexation projects of the Great Power
period were hastily and thinly camouflaged as proposed acts of this poor
little birth of April 28th. The newly born and barely animate League was
represented to be distributing, with all the reckless munificence of a
captive pope, “mandates” to the old imperialisms that, had it been the
young Hercules we desired, it would certainly have strangled in its
cradle. Britain was to have extensive “mandates” in Mesopotamia and East
Africa; France was to have the same in Syria; Italy was to have all her
holdings to the west and southeast of Egypt consolidated as mandatory
territory. Clearly, if the weak thing that was being nursed by its
Secretary in its cradle at Geneva into some semblance of life, did
presently succumb to the infantile weakness of all institutions born
without passion, all these “mandates” would become frank annexations.
Moreover, all the powers fought tooth and nail at the Conference for
“strategic” frontiers--the ugliest symptom of all. Why should a state
want a strategic frontier unless it contemplates war? If on that plea
Italy insisted upon a subject population of Germans in the southern
Tyrol and a subject population of Yugo-Slavs in Dalmatia, and if little
Greece began landing troops in Asia Minor, neither France nor Britain
was in a position to rebuke these outbreaks of pre-millennial method.