But now the interest in this game of European diplomacy shifted to
Germany. Already the common sense of the natural political map had
asserted itself. In 1848 all Germany, including, of course, German
Austria, was for a time united under the Frankfort parliament. But that
sort of union was particularly offensive to all the German courts and
foreign offices; they did not want a Germany united by the will of its
people, they wanted Germany united by regal and diplomatic action--as
Italy was being united. In 1848 the German parliament had insisted that
the largely German provinces of Schleswig-Holstein, which had been in
the German Bund, must belong to Germany. It had ordered the Prussian
army to occupy them, and the king of Prussia had refused to take his
orders from the German parliament, and so had precipitated the downfall
of that body. Now the King of Denmark, Christian IX, for no conceivable
motive except the natural folly of kings, embarked upon a campaign of
annoyance against the Germans in these two duchies. Prussian affairs
were then very much in the hands of a minister of the
seventeenth-century type, Von Bismarck (count in 1865, prince in 1871),
and he saw brilliant opportunities in this trouble. He became the
champion of the German nationality in these duchies--it must be
remembered that the King of Prussia had refused to undertake this rôle
for democratic Germany in 1848--and he persuaded Austria to side with
Prussia in a military intervention. Denmark had no chance against these
Great Powers; she was easily beaten and obliged to relinquish the
duchies. Then Bismarck picked a quarrel with Austria for the possession
of these two small states. So he brought about a needless and
fratricidal war of Germans for the greater glory of Prussia and the
ascendancy of the Hohenzollern dynasty in Germany. German writers of a
romantic turn of mind represent Bismarck as a great statesman planning
the unity of Germany; but indeed he was doing nothing of the kind. The
unity of Germany was a reality in 1848. It was and is in the nature of
things. The Prussian monarchy was simply delaying the inevitable in
order to seem to achieve it in Prussian fashion. That is why, when at
last Germany was unified, instead of bearing the likeness of a modern
civilized people, it presented itself to the world with the face of this
archaic Bismarck, with a fierce moustache, huge jack boots, a spiked
helmet, and a sword.