The fundamental tongues of these nine main language groups we have noted
were not by any means all the human speech beginnings of the Neolithic
Age. There may have been other, and possibly many other, ineffective
centres of speech which were afterwards overrun by the speakers of still
surviving tongues, and of elementary languages which faded out. We find
strange little patches of speech still in the world which do not seem to
be connected with any other language about them. Sometimes, however, an
exhaustive inquiry seems to affiliate these disconnected patches, seems
to open out to us tantalizing glimpses of some simpler, wider, and more
fundamental and universal form of human speech. One language group that
has been keenly discussed is the Basque group of dialects. The Basques
live now on the north and south slopes of the Pyrenees; they number
perhaps 600,000 altogether in Europe, and to this day they are a very
sturdy and independent-spirited people. Their language, as it exists
to-day, is a fully developed one. But it is developed upon lines
absolutely different from those of the Aryan languages about it. Basque
newspapers have been published in the Argentine and in the United States
to supply groups of prosperous emigrants. The earliest “French” settlers
in Canada were Basque, and Basque names are frequent among the French
Canadians to this day. Ancient remains point to a much wider
distribution of the Basque speech and people over Spain. For a long time
this Basque language was a profound perplexity to scholars, and its
structural character led to the suggestion that it might be related to
some Amer-Indian tongue. A. H. Keane, in _Man Past and Present_,
assembles reasons for linking it--though remotely--with the Berber
language of North Africa, and through the Berber with the general body
of Hamitic languages, but this relationship is questioned by other
philologists. They find Basque more akin to certain similarly stranded
vestiges of speech found in the Caucasian Mountains, and they are
disposed to regard it as a last surviving member, much changed and
specialized, of a once very widely extended group of pre-Hamitic
languages, otherwise extinct, spoken chiefly by peoples of that brunet
Mediterranean race (round-barrow men) which once occupied most of
western and southern Europe and western Asia, and which may have been
very closely related to the Dravidians of India and the peoples with a
heliolithic culture who spread eastward thence through the East Indies
to Polynesia and beyond.