On such terms of unrighteousness what we may call “Grand Monarchy”
established itself in France. Louis XIV, styled the Grand Monarque,
reigned for the unparalleled length of seventy-two years (1643-1715),
and set a pattern for all the kings of Europe. At first he was guided by
his Machiavellian minister, Cardinal Mazarin; after the death of the
Cardinal he himself in his own proper person became the ideal “Prince.”
He was, within his limitations, an exceptionally capable king; his
ambition was stronger than his baser passions, and he guided his
country towards bankruptcy through the complication of a spirited
foreign policy, with an elaborate dignity that still extorts our
admiration. His immediate desire was to consolidate and extend France to
the Rhine and Pyrenees, and to absorb the Spanish Netherlands; his
remoter view saw the French kings as the possible successors of
Charlemagne in a recast Holy Roman Empire. He made bribery a state
method almost more important than warfare. Charles II of England was in
his pay, and so were most of the Polish nobility, presently to be
described. His money, or rather the money of the tax-paying classes in
France, went everywhere. But his prevailing occupation was splendour.
His great palace at Versailles, with its salons, its corridors, its
mirrors, its terraces and fountains and parks and prospects, was the
envy and admiration of the world. He provoked a universal imitation.
Every king and princelet in Europe was building his own Versailles as
much beyond his means as his subjects and credits would permit.
Everywhere the nobility rebuilt or extended their chateaux to the new
pattern. A great industry of beautiful and elaborate fabrics and
furnishings developed. The luxurious arts flourished everywhere;
sculpture in alabaster, faience, gilt wood-work, metal work, stamped
leather, much music, magnificent painting, beautiful printing and
bindings, fine cookery, fine vintages. Amidst the mirrors and fine
furniture went a strange race of “gentlemen” in vast powdered wigs,
silks and laces, poised upon high red heels, supported by amazing canes;
and still more wonderful “ladies,” under towers of powdered hair and
wearing vast expansions of silk and satin sustained on wire. Through it
all postured the great Louis, the sun of his world, unaware of the
meagre and sulky and bitter faces that watched him from those lower
darknesses to which his sunshine did not penetrate.