We have already pointed out that there must be a natural political map
of the world which gives the best possible geographical divisions for
human administrations. Any other political division of the world than
this natural political map will necessarily be a misfit, and must
produce stresses of hostility and insurrection tending to shift
boundaries in the direction indicated by the natural political map.
These would seem to be self-evident propositions were it not that the
diplomatists at Vienna evidently neither believed nor understood
anything of the sort, and thought themselves as free to carve up the
world as one is free to carve up such a boneless structure as a cheese.
Nor were these propositions evident to Mr. Gladstone. Most of the
upheavals and conflicts that began in Europe as the world recovered from
the exhaustion of the Napoleonic wars were quite obviously attempts of
the ordinary common men to get rid of governments that were such misfits
as to be in many cases intolerable. Generally the existing governments
were misfits throughout Europe because they were not socially
representative, and so they were hampering production and wasting human
possibilities; but when there were added to these universal annoyances
differences of religion and racial culture between rulers and ruled (as
in most of Ireland), differences in race and language (as in Austrian
North Italy and throughout most of the Austrian Empire), or differences
in all these respects (as in Poland and the Turkish Empire in Europe),
the exasperation drove towards bloodshed. Europe was a system of
governing machines abominably adjusted. But Mr. Gladstone was no patient
mechanic set upon easing and righting the clumsy injuries of those
stupid adjustments. He was a white-faced, black-haired man of incredible
energy, with eyes like an eagle’s, wrath almost divine, and the “finest
baritone voice in Europe.” He apprehended these things romantically,
therefore, in a manner suitable for passionate treatment in large halls.