Such were the miscellaneous origins of the citizens of the Thirteen
Colonies.[424] The possibility of their ever becoming closely united
would have struck an impartial observer in 1760 as being very slight.
Superadded to the initial differences of origin, fresh differences were
created by climate. North of the Mason and Dixon line farming was
practised mainly upon British or Central European lines by free white
cultivators. The settled country of New England took on a likeness to
the English countryside; considerable areas of Pennsylvania developed
fields and farmhouses like those of South Germany. The distinctive
conditions in the north had, socially, important effects. Masters and
men had to labour together as backwoodsmen, and were equalized in the
process. They did not start equally; many “servants” are mentioned in
the roster of the _Mayflower_. But they rapidly became equal under
colonial conditions; there was, for instance, a vast tract of land to be
had for the taking, and the “servant” went off and took land like his
master. The English class system disappeared. Under colonial conditions
there arose equality “in the faculties both of body and mind,” and an
individual independence of judgment impatient of interference from
England. But south of the Mason and Dixon line tobacco growing began,
and the warmer climate encouraged the establishment of plantations with
gang labour. Red Indian captives were employed; Cromwell sent Irish
prisoners of war to Virginia, which did much to reconcile the Royalist
planters to republicanism; convicts were sent out, and there was a
considerable trade in kidnapped children, who were “spirited away” to
America to become apprentices or bond slaves. But the most convenient
form of gang labour proved to be that of negro slaves. The first negro
slaves were brought to Jamestown in Virginia by a Dutch ship as early as
1620. By 1700 negro slaves were scattered all over the states, but
Virginia, Maryland, and the Carolinas were their chief regions of
employment, and while the communities to the north were communities of
not very rich and not very poor farming men, the south developed a type
of large proprietor and a white community of overseers and professional
men subsisting on slave labour. Slave labour was a necessity to the
social and economic system that had grown up in the south; in the north
the presence of slaves was unnecessary and in some respects
inconvenient. Conscientious scruples about slavery were more free,
therefore, to develop and flourish in the northern atmosphere. To this
question of the revival of slavery in the world we must return when we
come to consider the perplexities of American Democracy. Here we note it
simply as an added factor in the heterogeneous mixture of the British
Colonies.[425]