It is the custom of historians to treat these struggles with extreme
respect. In particular the figure of Julius Cæsar is set up as if it
were a star of supreme brightness and importance in the history of
mankind.[253] Yet a dispassionate consideration of the known facts fails
altogether to justify this demi-god theory of Cæsar. Not even that
precipitate wrecker of splendid possibilities, Alexander the Great, has
been so magnified and dressed up for the admiration of careless and
uncritical readers. There is a type of scholar who, to be plain, sits
and _invents_ marvellous world policies for the more conspicuous figures
in history with the merest scraps of justification or with no
justification at all. We are told that Alexander planned the conquest of
Carthage and Rome and the complete subjugation of India, and that only
his death shattered these schemes. What we know for certain is that he
conquered the Persian Empire, and never went far beyond its boundaries;
and that when he was supposed to be making these vast and noble plans,
he was in fact indulging in such monstrous antics as his mourning for
his favourite Hephæstion, and as his main occupation he was drinking
himself to death. So too Julius Cæsar is credited with the intention of
doing just that one not impossible thing which would have secured the
Roman Empire from its ultimate collapse--namely, the systematic conquest
and civilization of Europe as far as the Baltic and the Dnieper. He was
to have marched upon Germany, says Plutarch, through Parthia and
Scythia, round the north of the Caspian and Black Seas. Yet the fact we
have to reconcile with this wise and magnificent project is that at the
crest of his power, Cæsar, already a bald, middle-aged man, past the
graces and hot impulses of youthful love, spent the better part of a
year in Egypt, feasting and entertaining himself in amorous pleasantries
with the Egyptian queen Cleopatra. And afterwards he brought her with
him to Rome, where her influence over him was bitterly resented. Such
complications with a woman mark the elderly sensualist or
sentimentalist--he was fifty-four at the commencement of the
_affaire_--rather than the master-ruler of men.