The opening of Solomon’s reign is as bloody as his father’s. The last
recorded speech of David arranges for the murder of Shimei; his last
recorded word is “blood.” “But his hoar head bring thou down to the
grave with blood,” he says, pointing out that though old Shimei is
protected by a vow David had made to the Lord so long as David lives,
there is nothing to bind Solomon in that matter. Solomon proceeds to
murder his brother, who has sought the throne but quailed and made
submission. He then deals freely with his brother’s party. The weak hold
of religion upon the racially and mentally confused Hebrews at that time
is shown by the ease with which he replaces the hostile chief priest by
his own adherent Zadok, and still more strikingly by the murder of Joab
by Benaiah, Solomon’s chief ruffian, in the Tabernacle, while the victim
is claiming sanctuary and holding to the very horns of Jehovah’s altar.
Then Solomon sets to work, in what was for that time a thoroughly modern
spirit, to recast the religion of his people. He continues the alliance
with Hiram, King of Sidon, who uses Solomon’s kingdom as a high road by
which to reach and build shipping upon the Red Sea, and a hitherto
unheard-of wealth accumulates in Jerusalem as a result of this
partnership. Gang labour appears in Israel; Solomon sends relays of men
to cut cedarwood in Lebanon under Hiram, and organizes a service of
porters through the land. (There is much in all this to remind the
reader of the relations of some Central African chief to a European
trading concern.) Solomon then builds a palace for himself, and a temple
not nearly as big for Jehovah. Hitherto, the Ark of the Covenant, the
divine symbol of these ancient Hebrews, had abode in a large tent,
which had been shifted from one high place to another, and sacrifices
had been offered to the God of Israel upon a number of different high
places. Now the ark is brought into the golden splendours of the inner
chamber of a temple of cedar-sheathed stone, and put between two great
winged figures of gilded olivewood, and sacrifices are henceforth to be
made only upon the altar before it.