The Sixth Crusade (1229) was a crusade bordering upon absurdity. The
Emperor Frederick II had promised to go upon a crusade, and evaded his
vow. He had made a false start and returned. He was probably bored by
the mere idea of a crusade. But the vow had been part of the bargain by
which he secured the support of Pope Innocent III in his election as
emperor. He busied himself in reorganizing the government of his
Sicilian kingdom, though he had given the Pope to understand that he
would relinquish these possessions if he became emperor; and the Pope
was anxious to stop this process of consolidation by sending him to the
Holy Land. The Pope did not want Frederick II, or any German emperor at
all in Italy, because he himself wished to rule Italy. As Frederick II
remained evasive, Gregory IX excommunicated him, proclaimed a crusade
against him, and invaded his dominions in Italy (1228). Whereupon the
Emperor sailed with an army to the Holy Land. There he had a meeting
with the Sultan of Egypt (the Emperor spoke six languages freely,
including Arabic); and it would seem these two gentlemen, both of
sceptical opinions, exchanged views of a congenial sort, discussed the
Pope in a worldly spirit, debated the Mongolian rush westward, which
threatened them both alike, and agreed finally to a commercial
convention, and the surrender of a part of the kingdom of Jerusalem to
Frederick. This indeed was a new sort of crusade, a crusade by private
treaty. As this astonishing crusader had been excommunicated, he had to
indulge in a purely secular coronation in Jerusalem, taking the crown
from the altar with his own hand, in a church from which all the clergy
had gone. Probably there was no one to show him the Holy Places; indeed
these were presently all put under an interdict by the Patriarch of
Jerusalem and locked up; manifestly the affair differed altogether in
spirit from the red onslaught of the First Crusade. It had not even the
kindly sociability of the Caliph Omar’s visit six hundred years before.
Frederick II rode out of Jerusalem almost alone, returned from this
unromantic success to Italy, put his affairs there in order very
rapidly, chased the papal armies out of his possessions, and obliged the
Pope to give him absolution from his excommunication (1230). This Sixth
Crusade was indeed not only the _reductio ad absurdum_ of crusades, but
of papal excommunications. Of this Frederick II we shall tell more in a
later section, because he was very typical of certain new forces that
were coming into European affairs.