Looking back upon this period, which came to its climax in the
eighteenth century, looking back, as we can begin to do nowadays, and
seeing its events in relation to the centuries that came before it and
to the great movements of the present time, we are able to realize how
transitory and provisional were its political forms and how unstable its
securities. Provisional it was as no other age has been provisional, an
age of assimilation and recuperation, a political pause, a gathering up
of the ideas of men and the resources of science for a wider human
effort. But the contemporary mind did not see it in that light. The
failure of the great creative ideas as they had been formulated in the
Middle Ages, had left human thought for a time destitute of the guidance
of creative ideas; even educated and imaginative men saw the world
undramatically; no longer as an interplay of effort and destiny, but as
the scene in which a trite happiness was sought and the milder virtues
were rewarded. It was not simply the contented and conservative-minded
who, in a world of rapid changes, were under the sway of this assurance
of an achieved fixity of human conditions. Even highly critical and
insurgent intelligences, in default of any sustaining movements in the
soul of the community, betrayed the same disposition. Political life,
they felt, had ceased to be the urgent and tragic thing it had once
been; it had become a polite comedy. The eighteenth was a century of
comedy--which at the end grew grim. It is inconceivable that that world
of the middle eighteenth century could have produced a Jesus of
Nazareth, a Gautama, a Francis of Assisi, an Ignatius of Loyola. If one
may imagine an eighteenth-century John Huss, it is impossible to imagine
anyone with sufficient passion to burn him. Until the stirrings of
conscience in Britain that developed into the Methodist revival began,
we can detect scarcely a suspicion that there still remained great tasks
in hand for our race to do, that enormous disturbances were close at
hand, or that the path of man through space and time was dark with
countless dangers, and must to the end remain a high and terrible
enterprise.