[294] Here, from another point of view, are some remarks upon the
acceptance of Christianity by the empire. Let us remember that the
Church, an object so familiar to us, was to the decent Roman a very
strange thing. It was a vast society for mutual help, quite outside the
state and the recognized corporations; it was secret (hence the frequent
inquisitions and the praise given by Church historians to those who
“confessed Christ”); it drew its main strength from a class “not well
thought of by the police, the proletariat of the big manufacturing towns
of Syria and the Levant, like Antioch.” Alternately proscribed and
connived at, much subjected to pogroms, it gradually increased in
strength. Diocletian summoned his two associated Cæsars to a conference
on the subject, and they decided to crush the society by a drastic
persecution. They persecuted and failed, and Diocletian resigned.
Constantine the Great, the next claimant to the empire, made terms with
the society and succeeded. He established it as official, and overcame
its hatred of Rome by showering wealth and power on it. Eventually, when
in fear of death, he got baptized. All modern analogies are fallacious,
but if you imagine a blend of pacifist international socialists with
some mystical Indian sect, drawing its supporters mainly from an
oppressed and ill-liked foreign proletariat, such as the “hunkey”
population of some big American towns, full of the noblest moral
professions but at the same time alien, or even hostile, to the whole
established order of society, I think you will get the sort of
impression that the Christian society made on a Roman. The conception of
the blameless and saintly Early Christian is, I think, hugely romance.
Of course, like most religious reformers, they were in the main seekers
after righteousness and above the average of their contemporaries. Also
the Christian writers are apt to have more life and vision than their
conventional or reactionary Pagan contemporaries. But consider the
appalling accusations made by all the Christian sects against each
other, and the furious denunciation of the turbulent Christian monastics
by Augustine. Also consider what a spirit lies behind the Book of
Revelation! Read especially Chapters 17-19, a series of elaborate and
horrific curses upon Rome (including repeated threats of its destruction
by fire, which the Christians were believed to have attempted), or the
end of Chapter 14 where the ministers of the Son of Man tread the
winepress of the world till the blood comes “even to the bridles of the
horses.” If we found such a book now circulating in India, with England
taking the place of Rome, I fear there would be some shooting and
hanging. The fact that the Christians actually prayed for the
destruction of the whole world by fire seemed to the average
non-Christian evidence of almost maniacal wickedness.