These scriptures consist of a number of different elements. The first
five books, the _Pentateuch_, were early regarded with peculiar respect.
They begin in the form of a universal history with a double account of
the Creation of the world and mankind, of the early life of the race,
and of a great Flood by which, except for certain favoured individuals,
mankind was destroyed. Excavations have revealed Babylonian versions of
both the Creation story and the Flood story of prior date to the
restoration of the Jews, and it is therefore argued by Biblical critics
that these opening chapters were acquired by the Jews during their
captivity. They constitute the first ten chapters of Genesis. There
follows a history of the fathers and founders of the Hebrew nation,
Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob. They are presented as patriarchal Bedouin
chiefs, living the life of nomadic shepherds in the country between
Babylonia and Egypt. The existing Biblical account is said by the
critics to be made up out of several pre-existing versions; but whatever
its origins, the story, as we have it to-day, is full of colour and
vitality. What is called Palestine to-day was at that time the land of
Canaan, inhabited by a Semitic people called the Canaanites, closely
related to the Phœnicians who founded Tyre and Sidon, and to the
Amorites who took Babylon and, under Hammurabi, founded the first
Babylonian Empire. The Canaanites were a settled folk in the days--which
were perhaps contemporary with the days of Hammurabi--when Abraham’s
flocks and herds passed through the land. The God of Abraham, says the
Bible narrative, promised this smiling land of prosperous cities to him
and to his children. To the book of Genesis the reader must go to read
how Abraham, being childless, doubted this promise, and of the births of
Ishmael and Isaac. And in Genesis too, he will find the lives of Isaac
and Jacob, whose name was changed to Israel, and of the twelve sons of
Israel; and how in the days of a great famine they went down into Egypt.
With that, Genesis, the first book of the Pentateuch, ends. The next
book, Exodus, is concerned with the story of Moses.