Georges Benjamin Clemenceau[522] was an old journalist politician, a
great denouncer of abuses, a great upsetter of governments, a doctor who
had, while a municipal councillor, kept a free clinic, and a fierce,
experienced duellist. None of his duels ended fatally, but he faced them
with great intrepidity. He had passed from the medical school to
republican journalism in the days of the Empire. In those days he was an
extremist of the left. He was for a time a teacher in America, and he
married and divorced an American wife. He was thirty in the eventful
year 1871. He returned to France after Sedan, and flung himself into the
stormy politics of the defeated nation with great fire and vigour.
Thereafter France was his world, the France of vigorous journalism,
high-spirited personal quarrels, challenges, confrontations, scenes,
dramatic effects, and witticisms at any cost. He was what people call
“fierce stuff,” he was nicknamed the “Tiger,” and he seems to have been
rather proud of his nickname. Professional patriot rather than statesman
and thinker, this was the man whom the war had flung up to misrepresent
the fine mind and the generous spirit of France.[523] His limitations
had a profound effect upon the conference, which was further coloured
by the dramatic resort for the purpose of signature to the very Hall of
Mirrors at Versailles in which Germany had triumphed and proclaimed her
unity. There the Germans were to sign. To M. Clemenceau and to France,
in that atmosphere, the war ceased to seem a world war; it was merely
the sequel of the previous conflict of the Terrible Year, the downfall
and punishment of offending Germany. “The world had to be made safe for
democracy,” said President Wilson. That from M. Clemenceau’s expressed
point of view was “talking like Jesus Christ.” The world had to be made
safe for Paris. “Talking like Jesus Christ” seemed a very ridiculous
thing to many of those brilliant rather than sound diplomatists and
politicians who made the year 1919 supreme in the history of human
insufficiency.