The Emperor Frederick II is a very convenient example of the sort of
doubter and rebel the thirteenth century could produce. It may be
interesting to tell a little of this intelligent and cynical man. He was
the son of the German Emperor, Henry VI, and grandson of Frederick
Barbarossa, and his mother was the daughter of Roger I, the Norman King
of Sicily. He inherited this kingdom in 1198, when he was four years
old; his mother was his guardian for six months, and when she died, Pope
Innocent III (1198 to 1216) became regent and guardian. He seems to have
had an exceptionally good and remarkably mixed education, and his
accomplishments earned him the flattering title of _Stupor mundi_, the
amazement of the world. The result of getting an Arabic view of
Christianity, and a Christian view of Islam, was to make him believe
that all religions were impostures, a view held perhaps by many a
stifled observer in the Age of Faith. But he talked about his views; his
blasphemies and heresies are on record. Growing up under the arrogant
rule of Innocent III, who never seems to have realized that his ward had
come of age, he developed a slightly humorous evasiveness. It was the
papal policy to prevent any fresh coalescence of the power of Germany
and Italy, and it was equally Frederick’s determination to get whatever
he could. When presently opportunity offered him the imperial crown of
Germany, he secured the Pope’s support by agreeing, if he were elected,
to relinquish his possessions in Sicily and South Italy, and to put down
heresy in Germany. For Innocent III was one of the great persecuting
Popes, an able, grasping, and aggressive man. (For a Pope, he was
exceptionally young. He became Pope at thirty-seven.) It was Innocent
who had preached a cruel crusade against the heretics in the south of
France, a crusade that presently became a looting expedition beyond his
control. So soon as Frederick was elected emperor (1211),[355] Innocent
pressed for the performance of the vows and promises he had wrung from
his dutiful ward. The clergy were to be freed from lay jurisdiction and
from taxation, and exemplary cruelties were to be practised upon the
heretics. None of which things Frederick did. As we have already told,
he would not even relinquish Sicily. He liked Sicily as a place of
residence better than he liked Germany.