These successes were not gained directly by the forces of the King of
England; they were gained by the East India Trading Company, which had
been originally, at the time of its incorporation under Queen Elizabeth,
no more than a company of sea adventurers. Step by step they had been
forced to raise troops and arm their ships. And now this trading
company, with its tradition of gain, found itself dealing not merely in
spices and dyes and tea and jewels, but in the revenues and territories
of princes and the destinies of India. It had come to buy and sell, and
it found itself achieving a tremendous piracy. There was no one to
challenge its proceedings. Is it any wonder that its captains and
commanders and officials, nay, even its clerks and common soldiers, came
back to England loaded with spoils? Men under such circumstances, with a
great and wealthy land at their mercy, could not determine what they
might or might not do. It was a strange land to them, with a strange
sunlight; its brown people were a different race, outside their range of
sympathy; its temples and buildings seemed to sustain fantastic
standards of behaviour. Englishmen at home were perplexed when presently
these generals and officials came back to make dark accusations against
each other of extortions and cruelties. Upon Clive Parliament passed a
vote of censure. He committed suicide in 1774. In 1788 Warren Hastings,
a second great Indian administrator, was impeached and acquitted (1792).
It was a strange and unprecedented situation in the world’s history. The
English Parliament found itself ruling over a London trading company,
which in its turn was dominating an empire far greater and more populous
than all the domains of the British crown. To the bulk of the English
people India was a remote, fantastic, almost inaccessible land, to which
adventurous poor young men went out, to return after many years very
rich and very choleric old gentlemen. It was difficult for the English
to conceive what the life of these countless brown millions in the
eastern sunshine could be. Their imaginations declined the task. India
remained romantically unreal. It was impossible for the English,
therefore, to exert any effective supervision and control over the
company’s proceedings.