Before 1200 B.C., that is to say before the rise of the Assyrian empire,
the siege of Troy, and the final destruction of Cnossos, but after the
time of Amenophis IV, Italy, like Spain, was probably still inhabited
mainly by dark white people of the more fundamental Iberian or
Mediterranean race.[225] This aboriginal population was probably a thin
and backward one. But already in Italy, as in Greece, the Aryans were
coming southward. By 1000 B.C. immigrants from the north had settled
over most of the north and centre of Italy, and, as in Greece, they had
inter-married with their darker predecessors and established a group of
Aryan languages, the Italian group, more akin to the Keltic
(Gaelic)[226] than to any other, of which the most interesting from the
historical point of view was that spoken by the Latin tribes in the
plains south and east of the river Tiber. Meanwhile the Greeks had been
settling down in Greece, and now they were taking to the sea and
crossing over to South Italy and Sicily and establishing themselves
there. Subsequently they established colonies along the French Riviera
and founded Marseilles upon the site of an older Phoenician colony.
Another interesting people also had come into Italy by sea. These were a
brownish sturdy people, to judge from the pictures they have left of
themselves; very probably they were a tribe of those Ægean “dark whites”
who were being driven out of Greece and Asia Minor and the islands in
between by the Greeks. We have already told the tale of Cnossos (Chapter
XVII) and of the settlement of the kindred Philistines in Palestine
(Chapter XXI, § 1). These Etruscans, as they were called in Italy, were
known even in ancient times to be of Asiatic origin, and it is tempting,
but probably unjustifiable, to connect this tradition with the Æneid,
the sham epic of the Latin poet Virgil, in which the Latin civilization
is ascribed to Trojan immigrants from Asia Minor. (But the Trojans
themselves were probably an Aryan people allied to the Phrygians.) These
Etruscan people conquered most of Italy north of the Tiber from the
Aryan tribes who were scattered over that country. Probably the
Etruscans ruled over a subjugated Italian population, so reversing the
state of affairs in Greece, in which the Aryans were uppermost.