We have been sketching in the last four chapters the growth of civilized
states out of the primitive Neolithic agriculture that began in
Mesopotamia perhaps 15,000, perhaps 20,000, years ago. It was at first
horticulture rather than agriculture; it was done with the hoe before
the plough, and at first it was quite supplementary to the sheep, goat,
and cattle tending that made the “living” of the family tribe. We have
traced the broad outlines of the development in regions of exceptional
fruitfulness of the first settled village communities into more populous
towns and cities, and the growth of the village shrine and the village
medicine-man into the city temple and the city priesthood. We have noted
the beginnings of organized war, first as a bickering between villages,
and then as a more disciplined struggle between the priest-king and god
of one city and those of another. Our story has passed on rapidly from
the first indications of conquest and empire in Sumer, perhaps 6000 or
7000 B.C., to the spectacle of great empires growing up, with roads and
armies, with inscriptions and written documents, with educated
priesthoods and kings and rulers sustained by a tradition already
ancient. We have traced in broad outline the appearance and conflicts
and replacements of these empires of the great rivers. We have directed
attention, in particular, to the evidence of a development of still
wider political ideas as we find it betrayed by the actions and
utterances of such men as Nabonidus and Amenophis IV. It has been an
outline of the accumulations of human experience for ten or fifteen
thousand years, a vast space of time in comparison with all subsequent
history, but a brief period when we measure it against the succession of
endless generations that intervenes between us and the first rude
flint-using human creatures of the Pleistocene dawn. But for these last
four chapters we have been writing almost entirely not about mankind
generally, but only about the men who thought, the men who could draw
and read and write, the men who were altering their world. Beneath their
activities what was the life of the mute multitude?