We will now review very briefly the main phases of the world struggle
which had thus commenced. Planned by Germany, it began with a swift
attack designed to “knock out” France while Russia was still getting her
forces together in the East. For a time all went well. Military science
is never up to date under modern conditions, because military men are as
a class unimaginative, there are always at any date undeveloped
inventions capable of disturbing current tactical and strategic practice
which the military intelligence has declined. The German plan had been
made for some years; it was a stale plan; it could probably have been
foiled at the outset by a proper use of entrenchments and barbed wire
and machine guns, but the French were by no means as advanced in their
military science as the Germans, and they trusted to methods of open
warfare that were at least fourteen years behind the times. They had a
proper equipment neither of barbed wire nor machine guns, and there was
a ridiculous tradition that the Frenchman did not fight well behind
earthworks. The Belgian frontier was defended by the fortress of Liège,
ten or twelve years out of date, with forts whose armament had been
furnished and fitted in many cases by German contractors; and the
French north-eastern frontier was very badly equipped. Naturally the
German armament firm of Krupp had provided nutcrackers for these nuts in
the form of exceptionally heavy guns firing high explosive shells. These
defences proved therefore to be mere traps for their garrisons. The
French attacked and failed in the southern Ardennes. The German hosts
swung round the French left with an effect of being irresistible; Liège
fell on August 9th, Brussels was reached on August 20th, and the small
British army of about 70,000, which had arrived in Belgium, was struck
at Mons (August 22nd) in overwhelming force, and driven backward in
spite of the very deadly rifle tactics it had learnt during the South
African War. (The German troops could not believe that the British were
using rifles and not machine guns against them.) The little British
force was pushed aside westward, and the German right swept down so as
to leave Paris to the west and crumple the entire French army back upon
itself.