We have already given an account in the previous chapter of the chief
irruptions of the barbarian races. We may now, with the help of a map,
make a brief review of the political divisions of Europe at the close of
the fifth century. No vestige of the Western Empire, the original Roman
Empire, remained as such. Over many parts of Europe a sort of legendary
overlordship of the Hellenic Eastern Empire held its place in men’s
minds. The emperor at Constantinople was, in theory at least, still
emperor. In Britain, the quite barbaric Teutonic Angles, Saxons, and
Jutes had conquered the eastern half of England; in the west of the
island the Britons still held out, but were gradually being forced back
into Wales and Cornwall. The Anglo-Saxons seem to have been among the
most ruthless and effective of barbarian conquerors, for wherever they
prevailed, their language completely replaced the Keltic or Latin
speech--it is not certain which[299]--used by the British. These
Anglo-Saxons were as yet not Christianized. Most of Gaul, Holland, and
the Rhineland was under the fairly vigorous, Christianized, and much
more civilized kingdom of the Franks. But the Rhone Valley was under
the separate kingdom of the Burgundians. Spain and some of the south of
France were under the rule of the Visigoths, but the Suevi were in
possession of the north-west corner of the peninsula. Of the Vandal
kingdom in Africa we have already written; and Italy, still in its
population and habits Roman, came under the rule of the Ostrogoths.
There was no emperor in Rome, but Theodoric I ruled there as the first
of a line of Gothic kings, and his rule extended across the Alps into
Pannonia and down the Adriatic to Dalmatia and Serbia. To the east of
the Gothic kingdom the emperors of Constantinople ruled definitely. The
Bulgars were still at this time a Mongolian tribe of horse-riding nomads
in the region of the Volga; the Aryan Serbs had recently come southward
to the shores of the Black Sea into the original home of the Visigoths;
the Turko-Finnish Magyars were not yet in Europe. The Lombards were as
yet north of the Danube.