The presence of the elected shire representatives in the English
Parliament, the second peculiarity of the British situation, came about
from very simple and apparently innocuous beginnings. From the shires,
or county divisions, knights seem to have been summoned to the national
council to testify to the taxable capacity of their districts. They were
sent up by the minor gentry, freeholders and village elders of their
districts as early as 1254, two knights from each shire. This idea
inspired Simon de Montfort,[407] who was in rebellion against Henry III,
the successor of John, to summon to the national council two knights
from each shire and two citizens from each city or borough. Edward I,
the successor to Henry III, continued this practice because it seemed a
convenient way of getting into financial touch with the growing towns.
At first there was considerable reluctance on the parts of the knights
and townsmen to attend Parliament, but gradually the power they
possessed of linking the redress of grievances with the granting of
subsidies was realized. Quite early, if not from the first, these
representatives of the general property owners in town and country, the
Commons, sat and debated apart from the great Lords and Bishops. So
there grew up in England a representative assembly, the Commons, beside
an episcopal and patrician one, the Lords. There was no profound and
fundamental difference between the personnel of the two assemblies; many
of the knights of the shire were substantial men who might be as wealthy
and influential as peers and also the sons and brothers of peers, but on
the whole the Commons was the more plebeian assembly. From the first
these two assemblies, and especially the Commons, displayed a
disposition to claim the entire power of taxation in the land. Gradually
they extended their purview of grievances to a criticism of all the
affairs of the realm. We will not follow the fluctuations of the power
and prestige of the English Parliament through the time of the Tudor
monarchs (_i.e._, Henry VII and VIII, Edward VI, Mary, and Elizabeth),
but it will be manifest from what has been said that when at last James
Stuart made his open claim to autocracy, the English merchants, peers,
and private gentlemen found themselves with a tried and honoured
traditional means of resisting him such as no other people in Europe
possessed.