The figure of Constantine the Great is at least as cardinal in history
as that of Alexander the Great or Augustus Cæsar. We know very little of
his personality or of his private life; no Plutarch, no Suetonius, has
preserved any intimate and living details about him. Abuse we have of
him from his enemies, and much obviously fulsome panegyric to set
against it; but none of these writers give us a living character of him;
he is a party symbol for them, a partisan flag. It is stated by the
hostile Zosimus that, like Sargon I, he was of illegitimate birth; his
father was a distinguished general and his mother, Helena, an
innkeeper’s daughter of Nish in Serbia. Gibbon,[295] however, is of
opinion that there was a valid marriage. In any case it was a lowly
marriage, and the personal genius of Constantine prevailed against
serious disadvantages. He was comparatively illiterate, he knew little
or no Greek. It appears to be true that he banished his eldest son
Crispus, and caused him to be executed at the instigation of the young
man’s stepmother, Fausta; and it is also recorded that he was afterwards
convinced of the innocence of Crispus, and caused Fausta to be
executed--according to one account by being boiled to death in her bath,
and according to another by being exposed naked to wild beasts on a
desolate mountain--while there is also very satisfactory documentary
evidence that she survived him. If she was executed, the fact remains
that her three sons, together with two nephews, became the appointed
heirs of Constantine. Clearly there is nothing solid to be got from this
libellous tangle, and such soufflé as is possible with these scanty
materials is to be found admirably done by Gibbon (chap. xviii.).
Gibbon, because of his anti-Christian animus, is hostile to Constantine;
but he admits that he was temperate and chaste. He accuses him of
prodigality because of his great public buildings, and of being vain and
dissolute (!) because in his old age he wore a wig--Gibbon wore his own
hair tied with a becoming black bow--and a diadem and magnificent robes.
But all the later emperors after Diocletian wore diadems and magnificent
robes.