He attempted nothing of the sort. He did not realize that there were
such things as modern states in the scheme of possibility. His little
imitative imagination was full of a deep cunning dream of being Cæsar
over again--as if this universe would ever tolerate anything of that
sort over again! He was scheming to make himself a real emperor, with a
crown upon his head and all his rivals and school-fellows and friends at
his feet. This could give him no fresh power that he did not already
exercise, but it would be more splendid--it would astonish his mother.
What response was there in a head of that sort for the splendid creative
challenge of the time? But first France must be prosperous. France
hungry would certainly not endure an emperor. He set himself to carry
out an old scheme of roads that Louis XV had approved; he developed
canals in imitation of the English canals; he reorganized the police and
made the country safe; and, preparing the scene for his personal drama,
he set himself to make Paris look like Rome, with classical arches, with
classical columns. Admirable schemes for banking development were
available, and he made use of them. In all these things he moved with
the times, they would have happened--with less autocracy, with less
centralization, if he had never been born. And he set himself to weaken
the republicans whose fundamental convictions he was planning to
outrage. He recalled the émigrés, provided they gave satisfactory
assurances to respect the new régime. Many were very willing to come
back on such terms, and let Bourbons be bygones. And he worked out a
great reconciliation, a Concordat, with Rome. Rome was to support him,
and he was to restore the authority of Rome in the parishes. France
would never be obedient and manageable, he thought; she would never
stand a new monarchy, without religion. “How can you have order in a
state,” he said, “without religion? Society cannot exist without
inequality of fortunes, which cannot endure apart from religion. When
one man is dying of hunger near another who is ill of surfeit, he cannot
resign himself to this difference, unless there is an authority which
declares--‘God wills it thus: there must be poor and rich in the world:
but hereafter and during all eternity the division of things will take
place differently.’” Religion--especially of the later Roman brand--was,
in fact, excellent stuff for keeping the common people quiet. In his
early honest Jacobin days he had denounced it for that very reason.