There is no sort of land animal in the world, as there is no sort of
land plant, whose structure is not primarily that of a water-inhabiting
being which has been adapted through the modification and
differentiation of species to life out of the water. This adaptation is
attained in various ways. In the case of the land scorpion the
gill-plates of the primitive sea scorpion are sunken into the body so as
to make the lung-books secure from rapid evaporation. The gills of
crustaceans, such as the crabs which run about in the air, are protected
by the gill-cover extensions of the back shell or carapace. The
ancestors of the insects developed a system of air pouches and air
tubes, the tracheal tubes, which carry the air all over the body before
it is dissolved. In the case of the vertebrated land animals, the gills
of the ancestral fish were first supplemented and then replaced by a
bag-like growth from the throat, the primitive lung swimming-bladder. To
this day there survive certain mudfish which enable us to understand
very clearly the method by which the vertebrated land animals worked
their way out of the water. These creatures (_e.g._ the African lung
fish) are found in tropical regions in which there is a rainy full
season and a dry season, during which the rivers become mere ditches of
baked mud. During the rainy season these fish swim about and breathe by
gills like any other fish. As the waters of the river evaporate, these
fish bury themselves in the mud, their gills go out of action, and the
creature keeps itself alive until the waters return by swallowing air,
which passes into its swimming-bladder. The Australian lung fish, when
it is caught by the drying up of the river in stagnant pools, and the
water has become deaerated and foul, rises to the surface and gulps air.
A newt in a pond does exactly the same thing. These creatures still
remain at the transition stage, the stage at which the ancestors of the
higher vertebrated animals were released from their restriction to an
under-water life.