Sir Mark Sykes[332] gives an account of the reality of his empire from
which we will quote certain passages. He says: “The Imperial Court was
polished, luxurious, and unlimitedly wealthy; the capital, Bagdad, a
gigantic mercantile city surrounding a huge administrative fortress,
wherein every department of state had a properly regulated and
well-ordered public office; where schools and colleges abounded; whither
philosophers, students, doctors, poets, and theologians flocked from all
parts of the civilized globe.... The provincial capitals were
embellished with vast public buildings, and linked together by an
effective and rapid service of posts and caravans; the frontiers were
secure and well garrisoned, the army loyal, efficient, and brave; the
governors and ministers honest and forbearing. The empire stretched with
equal strength and unimpaired control from the Cilician gates to Aden,
and from Egypt to Central Asia. Christians, Pagans, Jews, as well as
Moslems, were employed in the government service. Usurpers, rebellious
generals, and false prophets seemed to have vanished from the Moslem
dominions. Traffic and wealth had taken the place of revolution and
famine.... Pestilence and disease were met by Imperial hospitals and
government physicians.... In government business the rough-and-ready
methods of Arabian administration had given place to a complicated
system of Divans, initiated partly from the Roman, but chiefly taken
from the Persian system of government. Posts, Finance, Privy Seal, Crown
Lands, Justice, and Military affairs were each administered by separate
bureaux in the hands of ministers and officials; an army of clerks,
scribes, writers, and accountants swarmed into these offices and
gradually swept the whole power of the government into their own hands
by separating the Commander of the Faithful from any direct intercourse
with his subjects. The Imperial Palace and the entourage were equally
based on Roman and Persian precedents. Eunuchs, closely veiled ‘harems’
of women, guards, spies, go-betweens, jesters, poets, and dwarfs
clustered around the person of the Commander of the Faithful, each, in
his degree, endeavouring to gain the royal favour and indirectly
distracting the royal mind from affairs of business and state. Meanwhile
the mercantile trade of the East poured gold into Bagdad, and
supplemented the other enormous stream of money derived from the
contributions of plunder and loot despatched to the capital by the
commanders of the victorious raiding forces which harried Asia Minor,
India, and Turkestan. The seemingly unending supply of Turkish slaves
and Byzantine specie added to the richness of the revenues of Irak, and,
combined with the vast commercial traffic of which Bagdad was the
centre, produced a large and powerful moneyed class, composed of the
sons of generals, officials, landed proprietors, royal favourites,
merchants, and the like, who encouraged the arts, literature,
philosophy, and poetry as the mood took them, building palaces for
themselves, vying with each other in the luxury of their entertainments,
suborning poets to sound their praises, dabbling in philosophy,
supporting various schools of thought, endowing charities, and, in fact,
behaving as the wealthy have always behaved in all ages.