In that antithesis lies the essential historical importance of Napoleon.
His career marks the beginning of a new phase in the elations of strong
and able and energetic and advantageously placed men to the main mass of
mankind. They are robbed of Self-deception; they must either serve or
openly defy the idea of service. They must be humble or Napoleonic;
there is no more service with privilege and pride. Napoleon adorned
himself with ancient titles and antiquated robes, but the more he
brought himself into contact with tradition, the more manifestly he
displayed himself as something new. In the Tsar Alexander I, who was
never direct, this direct new imperialism met the old. Hitherto the
kings and potentates of the world had taken themselves in good faith,
had had the support of religion in their consciences, had believed they
were serving God in their kingship, and that they were necessary to
mankind and beneficial to mankind. In many cases they were no doubt
swayed by very mixed motives, his majesty had “weaknesses,” his majesty
almost always had a sensitive personal vanity. Sometimes, indeed, a born
rascal like Charles II of England would have the grace or the
gracelessness to laugh at himself, but the generality of kings and
tyrants had the profoundest faith in themselves, and were sustained by
the sincere faith of their loyal supporters. The emperor Charles V and
his son Philip II, Charles I of England, Louis XIV, and the Tsar
Alexander were all inspired by a complete assurance of their own
righteousness, were convinced that opposition to them was sheer
wickedness, wickedness to be overcome in any way and punished with the
utmost severity. But Napoleon knew himself for what he was, an
individual man getting the better of his fellow men. He had small doubt
in his struggle with the republicans, where the moral superiority lay.
With Napoleon, we note the beginning of a clearer-headed age. The
self-deceptions of wealth, power, and prominence wear thin. His new
imperialism reflected upon the old.