This quasi-insane concentration of the gifts and lives of the Barca
family upon revenge is but one instance of the narrowing and
embitterment of life that the stresses and universal sense of insecurity
of this great struggle produced in the minds of men. A quarter of a
century of war had left the whole western world miserable and harsh.
While the eleven-year-old Hannibal was taking his vow of undying hatred,
there was running about a farmhouse of Tusculum a small but probably
very disagreeable child of two named Marcus Porcius Cato. This boy lived
to be eighty-five years old, and his ruling passion seems to have been
hatred for any human happiness but his own. He was a good soldier, and
had a successful political career. He held a command in Spain, and
distinguished himself by his cruelties. He posed as a champion of
religion and public morality, and under this convenient cloak carried on
a lifelong war against everything that was young, gracious, or pleasant.
Whoever roused his jealousy incurred his moral disapproval. He was
energetic in the support and administration of all laws against dress,
against the personal adornment of women, against entertainments and free
discussion. He was so fortunate as to be made censor, which gave him
great power over the private lives of public people. He was thus able to
ruin public opponents through private scandals. He expelled Manlius from
the Senate for giving his wife a kiss in the daytime in the sight of
their daughter. He persecuted Greek literature, about which, until late
in life, he was totally ignorant. Then he read and admired Demosthenes.
He wrote in Latin upon agriculture and the ancient and lost virtues of
Rome. From these writings much light is thrown upon his qualities. One
of his maxims was that when a slave was not sleeping he should be
working. Another was that old oxen and slaves should be sold off. He
left the war horse that had carried him through his Spanish campaigns
behind him when he returned to Italy in order to save freight. He hated
other people’s gardens, and cut off the supply of water for garden use
in Rome. After entertaining company, when dinner was over he would go
out to correct any negligence in the service with a leather thong. He
admired his own virtues very greatly, and insisted upon them in his
writings. There was a battle at Thermopylæ against Antiochus the Great,
of which he wrote, “those who saw him charging the enemy, routing and
pursuing them, declared that Cato owed less to the people of Rome, than
the people of Rome owed to Cato.”[238] In his old age Cato became
lascivious and misconducted himself with a woman slave. Finally, when
his son protested against this disorder of their joint household, he
married a young wife, the daughter of his secretary, who was not in a
position to refuse his offer. (What became of the woman slave is not
told. Probably he sold her.) This compendium of all the old Roman
virtues died at an advanced age, respected and feared. Almost his last
public act was to urge on the Third Punic War and the final destruction
of Carthage. He had gone to Carthage as a commissioner to settle certain
differences between Carthage and Numidia, and he had been shocked and
horrified to find some evidences of prosperity and even of happiness in
that country.