The King was the traditional head of the army, and the habit of
obedience in soldiers is to the King. The Parliament had the greater
resources. The King set up his standard at Nottingham on the eve of a
dark and stormy August day in 1642. There followed a long and obstinate
civil war, the King holding Oxford, the Parliament, London. Success
swayed from side to side but the King could never close on London nor
Parliament take Oxford. Each antagonist was weakened by moderate
adherents who “did not want to go too far.” There emerged among the
Parliamentary commanders a certain Oliver Cromwell, who had raised a
small troop of horse and who rose to the position of general. Lord
Warwick, his contemporary, describes him as a plain man, in a cloth suit
“made by an ill country tailor.” He was no mere fighting soldier, but a
military organizer; he realized the inferior quality of many of the
Parliamentary forces, and set himself to remedy it. The Cavaliers of the
King had the picturesque tradition of chivalry and loyalty on their
side; Parliament was something new and difficult--without any
comparable traditions. “Your troops are most of them old decayed serving
men and tapsters,” said Cromwell. “Do you think that the spirits of such
base and mean fellows will ever be able to encounter gentlemen that have
honour and courage and resolution in them?” But there is something
better and stronger than picturesque chivalry in the world, religious
enthusiasm. He set himself to get together a “godly” regiment. They were
to be earnest, sober-living men. Above all, they were to be men of
strong convictions. He disregarded all social traditions, and drew his
officers from every class. “I had rather have a plain, russet-coated
captain _that knows what he fights for and loves what he knows_, than
what you call a gentleman and is nothing else.” England discovered a new
force, the Ironsides, in its midst, in which footmen, draymen, and
ships’ captains held high command, side by side with men of family. They
became the type on which the Parliament sought to reconstruct its entire
army. The Ironsides were the backbone of this “New Model.” From Marston
Moor to Naseby these men swept the Cavaliers before them. The King was
at last a captive in the hands of Parliament.