In the natural savage and in the untutored man to-day--for it is well to
keep in mind that no man to-day is more than four hundred generations
from the primordial savage--there is no limitation to the sphere of
ownership. Whatever you can fight for, you can own; women-folk, spared
captive, captured beast, forest glade, stone pit, or what not. As the
community grew and a sort of law came to restrain internecine fighting,
men developed rough and ready methods of settling proprietorship. Men
could own what they were the first to make or capture or claim. It
seemed natural that a debtor who could not pay up should become the
property of his creditor. Equally natural was it that, after claiming a
patch of land (“Bags I,” as the schoolboy says), a man should exact
payments and tribute from anyone else who wanted to use it. It was only
slowly, as the possibilities of organized life dawned on men, that this
unlimited property in anything whatever began to be recognized as a
nuisance. Men found themselves born into a universe all owned and
claimed, nay! they found themselves born, owned, and claimed. The social
struggles of the earlier civilization are difficult to trace now, but
the history we have told of the Roman republic shows a community waking
up to the idea that they may become a public inconvenience and should
then be repudiated, and that the unlimited ownership of land is also an
inconvenience. We find that later Babylonia severely limited the rights
of property in slaves. Finally, we find in the teaching of that great
revolutionist, Jesus of Nazareth, such an attack upon property as had
never been before. Easier it was, he said, for a camel to go through the
eye of a needle than for the owner of great possessions to enter the
kingdom of heaven. A steady, continuous criticism of the permissible
scope of property seems to have been going on in the world for the last
twenty-five or thirty centuries. Nineteen hundred years after Jesus of
Nazareth we find all the world that has come under the Christian
teaching persuaded that there could be no property in persons. There has
been a turn over in the common conscience in that matter. And also the
idea that “a man may do what he likes with his own” was clearly very
much shaken in relation to other sorts of property. But this world of
the closing eighteenth century was still only in the interrogative stage
in this matter. It had got nothing clear enough, much less settled
enough, to act upon. One of its primary impulses was to protect property
against the greed and waste of kings and the exploitation of noble
adventurers. It was to protect private property that the Revolution
began. But its equalitarian formulæ carried it into a criticism of the
very property it had risen to protect. How can men be free and equal
when numbers of them have no ground to stand upon and nothing to eat,
and the owners will neither feed nor lodge them unless they toil?
Excessively--the poor complained.