Before we can understand the qualities of Christianity, which must now
play a large part in our history, and which opened men’s eyes to fresh
aspects of the possibility of a unified world, we must go back some
centuries and tell of the condition of affairs in Palestine and Syria,
in which countries Christianity arose. We have already told in Chapter
XXI the main facts about the origin of the Jewish nation and tradition,
about the Diaspora, about the fundamentally scattered nature of Jewry
even from the beginning, and the gradual development of the idea of one
just God ruling the earth and bound by a special promise to preserve and
bring to honour the Jewish people. The Jewish idea was and is a curious
combination of theological breadth and an intense racial patriotism. The
Jews looked for a special saviour, a Messiah, who was to redeem mankind
by the agreeable process of restoring the fabulous glories of David and
Solomon, and bringing the whole world at last under the benevolent but
firm Jewish heel. As the political power of the Semitic peoples
declined, as Carthage followed Tyre into the darkness and Spain became
a Roman province, this dream grew and spread. There can be little doubt
that the scattered Phœnicians in Spain and Africa and throughout the
Mediterranean, speaking as they did a language closely akin to Hebrew
and being deprived of their authentic political rights, became
proselytes to Judaism. For phases of vigorous proselytism alternated
with phases of exclusive jealousy in Jewish history. On one occasion the
Idumeans, being conquered, were all forcibly made Jews.[275] There were
Arab tribes who were Jews in the time of Muhammad, and a Turkish people
who were mainly Jews in South Russia in the ninth century. Judaism is
indeed the reconstructed political ideal of many shattered
peoples--mainly Semitic. It is to the Phœnician contingent and to
Aramean accessions in Babylon that the financial and commercial
tradition of the Jews is to be ascribed. But as a result of these
coalescences and assimilations, almost everywhere in the towns
throughout the Roman Empire, and far beyond it in the east, Jewish
communities traded and flourished, and were kept in touch through the
Bible and through a religious and educational organization. The main
part of Jewry never was in Judea and had never come out of Judea.