The Princes of the Protestant countries when they seized upon the
national churches early apprehended the necessity of gripping the
universities also. Their idea of education was the idea of capturing
young clever people for the service of their betters. Beyond that they
were disposed to regard education as a mischievous thing. The only way
to an education, therefore, for a poor man was through patronage. Of
course there was a parade of encouragement towards learning in all the
Grand Monarchies, a setting up of Academies and Royal Societies, but
these benefited only a small class of subservient scholars. The church
also had learnt to distrust the educated poor man. In the great
aristocratic “crowned republic” of Britain there was the same shrinkage
of educational opportunity. “Both the ancient universities,” says
Hammond, in his account of the eighteenth century, “were the
universities of the rich. There is a passage in Macaulay describing the
state and pomp of Oxford at the end of the seventeenth century, ‘when
her Chancellor, the Venerable Duke of Ormonde, sat in his embroidered
mantle on his throne under the painted ceiling of the Sheldonian
theatre, surrounded by hundreds of graduates robed according to their
rank, while the noblest youths of England were solemnly presented to him
as candidates for academical honours.’ The university was a power, not
in the sense in which that could be said of a university like the old
university of Paris, whose learning could make Popes tremble, but in the
sense that the university was part of the recognized machinery of
aristocracy. What was true of the universities was true of the public
schools. Education in England was the nursery not of a society, but of
an order; not of a state, but of a race of owner-rulers.” The missionary
spirit had departed from education throughout Europe. To that quite as
much as to the amelioration of things by a diffused prosperity, this
phase of quiescence among the lower classes is to be ascribed. They had
lost brains and speech, and they were fed. The community was like a
pithed animal in the hands of the governing class.[416]