
This _Outline of History_ is an attempt to tell, truly and clearly, in
one continuous narrative, the whole story of life and mankind so far as
it is known to-day. It is written plainly for the general reader, but
its aim goes beyond its use as merely interesting reading matter. There
is a feeling abroad that the teaching of history considered as a part of
general education is in an unsatisfactory condition, and particularly
that the ordinary treatment of this “subject” by the class and teacher
and examiner is too partial and narrow. But the desire to extend the
general range of historical ideas is confronted by the argument that the
available time for instruction is already consumed by that partial and
narrow treatment, and that therefore, however desirable this extension
of range may be, it is in practice impossible. If an Englishman, for
example, has found the history of England quite enough for his powers of
assimilation, then it seems hopeless to expect his sons and daughters to
master universal history, if that is to consist of the history of
England, plus the history of France, plus the history of Germany, plus
the history of Russia, and so on. To which the only possible answer is
that universal history is at once something more and something less than
the aggregate of the national histories to which we are accustomed, that
it must be approached in a different spirit and dealt with in a
different manner. This book seeks to justify that answer. It has been
written primarily to show that _history as one whole_ is amenable to a
more broad and comprehensive handling than is the history of special
nations and periods, a broader handling that will bring it within the
normal limitations of time and energy set to the reading and education
of an ordinary citizen. This outline deals with ages and races and
nations, where the ordinary history deals with reigns and pedigrees and
campaigns; but it will not be found to be more crowded with names and
dates, nor more difficult to follow and understand. History is no
exception amongst the sciences; as the gaps fill in, the outline
simplifies; as the outlook broadens, the clustering multitude of details
dissolves into general laws. And many topics of quite primary interest
to mankind, the first appearance and the growth of scientific knowledge
for example, and its effects upon human life, the elaboration of the
ideas of money and credit, or the story of the origins and spread and
influence of Christianity, which must be treated fragmentarily or by
elaborate digressions in any partial history, arise and flow completely
and naturally in one general record of the world in which we live.