We cannot give here at any length the story of the wars and doings of
this monarch. In many ways Voltaire’s _Siècle de Louis XIV_ is still the
best and most wholesome account. He created a French navy fit to face
the English and Dutch; a very considerable achievement. But because his
intelligence did not rise above the lure of that Fata Morgana, that
crack in the political wits of Europe, the dream of a world-wide Holy
Roman Empire, he drifted in his later years to the propitiation of the
Papacy, which had hitherto been hostile to him. He set himself against
those spirits of independence and disunion, the Protestant princes, and
he made war against Protestantism in France. Great numbers of his most
sober and valuable subjects were driven abroad by his religious
persecutions, taking arts and industries with them. The English silk
manufacture, for instance, was founded by French Protestants. Under his
rule were carried out the “dragonnades,” a peculiarly malignant and
effectual form of persecution. Rough soldiers were quartered in the
houses of the Protestants, and were free to disorder the life of their
hosts and insult their womankind as they thought fit. Men yielded to
that sort of pressure who would not have yielded to rack and fire. The
education of the next generation of Protestants was broken up, and the
parents had to give Catholic instruction or none. They gave it, no
doubt, with a sneer and an intonation that destroyed all faith in it.
While more tolerant countries became mainly sincerely Catholic or
sincerely Protestant, the persecuting countries, like France and Spain
and Italy, so destroyed honest Protestant teaching that these peoples
became mainly Catholic believers or Catholic atheists, ready to break
out into blank atheism whenever the opportunity offered. The next reign,
that of Louis XV, was the age of that supreme mocker, Voltaire
(1694-1778), an age in which everybody in French society conformed to
the Roman church and hardly anyone believed in it.