And it is well to remind the reader here of the real dimensions of this
phase of the Terror, which strikes so vividly upon the imagination and
which has therefore been enormously exaggerated relatively to the rest
of the revolution. From 1789 to late in 1791 the French Revolution was
an orderly process, and from the summer of 1794 the Republic was an
orderly and victorious state. The Terror was not the work of the whole
country, but of the town mob which owed its existence and its savagery
to the misrule and social injustice of the ancient régime; and the
explosion of the Terror could have happened only through the persistent
treacherous disloyalty of the royalists which, while it raised the
extremists to frenzy, disinclined the mass of moderate republicans from
any intervention. The best men were busy fighting the Austrians and
royalists on the frontier. Altogether, we must remember, the total of
the killed in the Terror amounted to a few thousands, and among those
thousands there were certainly a great number of active antagonists whom
the Republic, by all the standards of that time, was entitled to kill.
It included such traitors and mischief-makers as Philip, Duke of
Orleans, of the Palais Royal, who had voted for the death of Louis XVI.
More lives were wasted by the British generals alone on the opening day
of what is known as the Somme offensive of July, 1916, than in the whole
French revolution from start to finish. We hear so much about the
martyrs of the French Terror because they were notable, well-connected
people, and because there has been a sort of propaganda of their
sufferings. But let us balance against them in our minds what was going
on in the prisons of the world generally at that time. In Britain and
America, while the Terror ruled in France, far more people were
slaughtered for offences--very often quite trivial offences--against
property than were condemned by the Revolutionary Tribunal for treason
against the State. Of course, they were very common people indeed, but
in their rough way they suffered. A girl was hung in Massachusetts in
1789 for forcibly taking the hat, shoes, and buckles of another girl she
had met in the street.[447] Again, Howard the philanthropist (about
1773) found a number of perfectly innocent people detained in the
English prisons who had been tried and acquitted, but were unable to pay
the gaoler’s fees. And these prisons were filthy places under no
effective control. Torture was still in use in the Hanoverian dominions
of his Britannic majesty King George III. It had been in use in France
up to the time of the National Assembly. These things mark the level of
the age. It is not on record that anyone was deliberately tortured by
the French revolutionaries during the Terror. Those few hundreds of
French gentlefolk fell into a pit that most of them had been well
content should exist for others. It was tragic, but not, by the scale of
universal history, a great tragedy. The common man in France was more
free, better off, and happier during the “Terror” than he had been in
1787.