These notes submitted to E. B. at this stage provoked him to a warm
protest. His sympathies were “heart and soul with G. M.,” and Mr.
Gladstone, he declared with emphasis, was not an ignorant man. A little
more must be said on this question. If the reader realize, what we have
been trying to make clear in this history, that human progress is
largely mental progress, a clearing and an enlargement of ideas, then he
will understand why it is that the compiler of this _Outline_ has given
so much space here to these controversial notes upon the education of
Mr. Gladstone. For the education of Mr. Gladstone was typical of that
ruling-class education which has dominated British and European affairs,
so far as they have been dominated by ideas, up to the present time. It
is most significant of the differences and difficulties of our age that
the statement, which seemed to the writer a simple statement of an
obvious fact, that Mr. Gladstone was a profoundly ignorant man, should
have so scandalized two of the editors of this work. No doubt Mr.
Gladstone knew much and knew many things, and it is just because he did
so and was in many respects the fine flower of the education of his
period, that his ignorance is so interesting to us. Many Chinese
mandarins knew much and many things--beautifully. And were ignorant men.
Mr. Gladstone’s was not the ignorance of deficiency, but the ignorance
of excess, a copious ignorance; it was not a failure to know this or
that particular fact, an ignorance excusable enough, but a profound and
sought-after and established ignorance of reality, so that he did not
grasp the bearing of definite facts presented to him or of far-reaching
ideas put before him, upon the great issues with which he was concerned.
He lived, as it were, in a luminous and blinding cloud. That cloud,
which I call his ignorance, my two editors call his wonderful and
abounding culture. It was a culture that wrapped about and adorned the
great goddess Reality. But indeed he is not to be adorned but stripped.
She ceases to be herself or to bless her votary unless she is faced
stark and faced fearlessly.--H. G. W.