We will not attempt to trace the fluctuating fortunes of the Sassanids
during the next three centuries. Throughout that time war between Persia
and the empire of Constantinople wasted Asia Minor like a fever.
Christianity spread widely and was persecuted, for after the
Christianization of Rome the Persian monarch remained the only
god-monarch on earth, and he saw in Christianity merely the propaganda
of his Byzantine rival. Constantinople became the protector of the
Christians and Persia of the Zoroastrians; in a treaty of 422, the one
empire agreed to tolerate Zoroastrianism and the other Christianity. In
483, the Christians of the east split off from the Orthodox church and
became the Nestorian church; which, as we have already noted, spread its
missionaries far and wide throughout Central and Eastern Asia. This
separation from Europe, since it freed the Christian bishops of the
east from the rule of the Byzantine patriarchs, and so lifted from the
Nestorian church the suspicion of political disloyalty, led to a
complete toleration of Christianity in Persia. With Chosroes I (531-579)
came a last period of Sassanid vigour. He was the contemporary and
parallel of Justinian. He reformed taxation, restored the orthodox
Zoroastrianism, extended his power into Southern Arabia (Yemen), which
he rescued from the rule of Abyssinian Christians, pushed his northern
frontier into Western Turkestan, and carried on a series of wars with
Justinian. His reputation as an enlightened ruler stood so high, that
when Justinian closed the schools of Athens, the last Greek philosophers
betook themselves to his court. They sought in him the philosopher
king--that mirage which, as we have noted, Confucius and Plato had
sought in their day. The philosophers found the atmosphere of orthodox
Zoroastrianism even less to their taste than orthodox Christianity, and
in 549 Chosroes had the kindness to insert a clause in an armistice with
Justinian, permitting their return to Greece, and ensuring that they
should not be molested for their pagan philosophy or their transitory
pro-Persian behaviour.