One of the earliest and most splendid in this constellation is the
Florentine, Leonardo da Vinci (1452-1519), a man with an almost
miraculous vision for reality. He was a naturalist, an anatomist, an
engineer, as well as a very great artist. He was the first modern to
realize the true nature of fossils,[389] he made note-books of
observations that still amaze us, he was convinced of the practicability
of mechanical flight. Another great name is that of Copernicus, a Pole
(1473-1543), who made the first clear analysis of the movements of the
heavenly bodies and showed that the earth moves round the sun. Tycho
Brahe (1546-1601), a Dane working at the university of Prague, rejected
this latter belief, but his observations of celestial movements were of
the utmost value to his successors, and especially to the German,
Kepler (1571-1630). Galileo Galilei (1564-1642) was the founder of the
science of dynamics. Before his time it was believed that a weight a
hundred times greater than another would fall a hundred times as fast.
Galileo denied this. Instead of arguing about it like a scholar and a
gentleman, he put it to the coarse test of experiment by dropping two
unequal weights from an upper gallery of the leaning tower of Pisa--to
the horror of all erudite men. He made what was almost the first
telescope, and he developed the astronomical views of Copernicus; but
the church, still struggling gallantly against the light, decided that
to believe that the earth was smaller and inferior to the sun made man
and Christianity of no account, and diminished the importance of the
Pope; so Galileo, under threats of dire punishment, when he was an old
man of sixty-nine, was made to recant this view and put the earth back
in its place as the immovable centre of the universe. He knelt before
ten cardinals in scarlet, an assembly august enough to overawe truth
itself, while he amended the creation he had disarranged. The story has
it that as he rose from his knees, after repeating his recantation, he
muttered, “_Eppur si muove_”--“it moves nevertheless.”