But this direct thrust of the Turkish peoples against Christendom to the
north of the Black Sea was, in the end, not nearly so important as their
indirect thrust south of it through the empire of the Caliph. We cannot
deal here with the tribes and dissensions of the Turkish peoples of
Turkestan, nor with the particular causes that brought to the fore the
tribes under the rule of the Seljuk clan. In the eleventh century these
Seljuk Turks broke with irresistible force not in one army, but in a
group of armies, and under two brothers, into the decaying fragments of
the Moslem Empire. For Islam had long ceased to be one empire. The
orthodox Sunnite Abbasid rule had shrunken to what was once Babylonia;
and even in Bagdad the Caliph was the mere creature of his Turkish
palace guards. A sort of mayor of the palace, a Turk, was the real
ruler. East of the Caliph, in Persia, and west of him in Palestine,
Syria, and Egypt, were Shiite heretics. The Seljuk Turks were orthodox
Sunnites; they now swept down upon and conquered the Shiite rulers and
upstarts, and established themselves as the protectors of the Bagdad
Caliph, taking over the temporal powers of the mayor of the palace. Very
early they conquered Armenia from the Greeks, and then, breaking the
bounds that had restrained the power of Islam for four centuries, they
swept on to the conquest of Asia Minor, almost to the gates of
Constantinople. The mountain barrier of Cilicia that had held the Moslem
so long had been turned by the conquest of Armenia from the northeast.
Under Alp Arslan, who had united all the Seljuk power in his own hands,
the Turks utterly smashed the Byzantine army at the battle of Manzikert,
or Melasgird (1071). The effect of this battle upon people’s
imaginations was very great. Islam, which had appeared far gone in
decay, which had been divided religiously and politically, was suddenly
discovered to have risen again, and it was the secure old Byzantine
Empire that seemed on the brink of dissolution. The loss of Asia Minor
was very swift. The Seljuks established themselves at Iconium (Konia),
in what is now Anatolia. In a little while they were in possession of
the fortress of Nicæa over against the capital.