In this history we have traced the growth of this idea of a religious
government of Christendom--and through Christendom of mankind--and we
have shown how naturally and how necessarily, because of the tradition
of world empire, it found a centre at Rome. The Pope of Rome was the
only Western patriarch; he was the religious head of a vast region in
which the ruling tongue was Latin; the other patriarchs of the Orthodox
Church spoke Greek, and so were inaudible throughout his domains; and
the two words _Filioque_, which had been added to the Latin creed (see
chap. xxx, § 8, and chap. xxxiii, § 6), had split off the Byzantine
Christians by one of those impalpable and elusive doctrinal points upon
which there is no reconciliation. (The final rupture was in 1054.) The
life of the Lateran changed in its quality with every occupant of the
chair of St. Peter: sometimes papal Rome was a den of corruption and
uncleanness, as it had been in the days of John XII; sometimes it was
pervaded by the influence of widely thinking and nobly thinking men. But
behind the Pope was the assembly of the cardinals, priests, and a great
number of highly educated officials, who never, even in the darkest and
wildest days, lost sight altogether of the very grand idea of a divine
world dominion, of a peace of Christ throughout the earth that St.
Augustine had expressed. Through all the Middle Ages that idea was the
guiding influence in Rome. For a time, perhaps, mean minds would prevail
there, and in the affairs of the world Rome would play the part of a
greedy, treacherous, and insanely cunning old woman; followed a phase of
masculine and quite worldly astuteness perhaps, or a phase of
exaltation. Came an interlude of fanaticism or pedantry, when all the
pressure was upon exact doctrine. Or there was a moral collapse, and the
Lateran became the throne of some sensuous or æsthetic autocrat, ready
to sell every hope or honour the Church could give for money to spend
upon pleasure or display. Yet, on the whole, the papal ship kept its
course, and came presently into the wind again.