It is necessary that the reader should have a definite idea of the
social condition of western Europe in the eighth century. It was not a
barbarism. Eastern Europe was still barbaric and savage; things had
progressed but little beyond the state of affairs described by Gibbon in
his account of the mission of Priscus to Attila (see vol. i, p. 557).
But western Europe was a shattered civilization, without law, without
administration, with roads destroyed and education disorganized, but
still with great numbers of people with civilized ideas and habits and
traditions. It was a time of confusion, of brigandage, of crimes
unpunished and universal insecurity. It is very interesting to trace how
out of the universal mêlée, the beginnings of a new order appeared. In a
modern breakdown there would probably be the formation of local
vigilance societies, which would combine and restore a police
administration and a roughly democratic rule. But in the broken-down
western empire of the sixth, seventh, and eighth centuries, men’s ideas
turned rather to leaders than to committees, and the centres about which
affairs crystallized were here barbaric chiefs, here a vigorous bishop
or some surviving claimant to a Roman official position, here a
long-recognized landowner or man of ancient family, and here again some
vigorous usurper of power. No solitary man was safe. So men were forced
to link themselves with others, preferably people stronger than
themselves. The lonely man chose the most powerful and active person in
his district and became _his_ man. The freeman or the weak lordling of a
petty territory linked himself to some more powerful lord. The
protection of that lord (or the danger of his hostility) became more
considerable with every such accession. So very rapidly there went on a
process of political crystallization in the confused and lawless sea
into which the Western Empire had liquefied. These natural associations
and alliances of protector and subordinates grew very rapidly into a
system, _the feudal system_, traces of which are still to be found in
the social structure of every European community west of Russia.