The mechanical revolution, the process of mechanical invention and
discovery, was a new thing in human experience, and it went on
regardless of the social, political, economic, and industrial
consequences it might produce. The industrial revolution, on the other
hand, like most other human affairs, was and is more and more profoundly
changed and deflected by the constant variation in human conditions
caused by the mechanical revolution. And the essential difference
between the amassing of riches, the extinction of small farmers and
small business men, and the phase of big finance in the latter centuries
of the Roman republic on the one hand, and the very similar
concentration of capital in the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries on
the other, lies in the profound difference in the character of labour
that the mechanical revolution was bringing about. The power of the old
world was human power; everything depended ultimately upon the driving
power of human muscle, the muscle of ignorant and subjugated men. A
little animal muscle, supplied by draft oxen, horse traction, and the
like, contributed. Where a weight had to be lifted, men lifted it; where
a rock had to be quarried, men chipped it out; where a field had to be
ploughed, men and oxen ploughed it; the Roman equivalent of the
steamship was the galley with its banks of sweating rowers. A vast
proportion of mankind in the early civilizations was employed in purely
mechanical drudgery. At its onset, power-driven machinery did not seem
to promise any release from such unintelligent toil. Great gangs of men
were employed in excavating canals, in making railway cuttings and
embankments, and the like. The number of miners increased enormously.
But the extension of facilities and the output of commodities increased
much more. And as the nineteenth century went on, the plain logic of the
new situation asserted itself more clearly. Human beings were no longer
wanted as a source of mere indiscriminated power. What could be done
mechanically by a human being could be done faster and better by a
machine. The human being was needed now only where choice and
intelligence had to be exercised. Human beings were wanted only as human
beings. The _drudge_, on whom all the previous civilizations had rested,
the creature of mere obedience, the man whose brains were superfluous,
had become unnecessary to the welfare of mankind.