By this time the enormous strain of the war was telling hardly upon all
the European populations. There had been a great disorganization of
transport everywhere, a discontinuance of the normal repairs and
replacements of shipping, railways, and the like, a using-up of material
of all sorts, a dwindling of food production, a withdrawal of greater
and greater masses of men from industry, a cessation of educational
work, and a steady diminution of the ordinary securities and honesties
of life. Nowhere was the available directive ability capable of keeping
a grip upon affairs in the face of the rupture of habitual bonds and the
replacement of the subtle disciplines of peace by the clumsy brutalities
of military “order.” More and more of the European population was being
transferred from surroundings and conditions to which it was accustomed,
to novel circumstances which distressed, stimulated, and demoralized it.
But Russia suffered first and most from this universal pulling up of
civilization from its roots. The Russian autocracy was dishonest and
incompetent. The Tsar, like several of his ancestors, had now given way
to a crazy pietism, and the court was dominated by a religious impostor,
Rasputin, whose cult was one of unspeakable foulness, a reeking scandal
in the face of the world. Beneath the rule of this dirty mysticism,
indolence and scoundrelism mismanaged the war. The Russian common
soldiers were sent into battle without guns to support them, without
even rifle ammunition; they were wasted by their officers and generals
in a delirium of militarist enthusiasm. For a time they seemed to be
suffering mutely as the beasts suffer; but there is a limit to the
endurance even of the most ignorant. A profound disgust for the Tsardom
was creeping through these armies of betrayed and wasted men. From the
close of 1915 onwards Russia was a source of deepening anxiety to her
Western allies. Throughout 1916 she remained largely on the defensive,
and there were rumours of a separate peace with Germany. She gave little
help to Roumania.