There is a considerable imaginative appeal in the obscure story of the
early American civilizations. It was largely a separate
development.[119] Somewhen at last the southward drift of the
Amerindians must have met and mingled with the eastward, canoe-borne
drift of the heliolithic culture. But it was the heliolithic culture
still at a very lowly stage and probably before the use of metals. It
has to be noted as evidence of this canoe-borne origin of American
culture, that elephant-headed figures are found in Central American
drawings. American metallurgy may have arisen independently of the
old-world use of metal, or it may have been brought by these elephant
carvers. These American peoples got to the use of bronze and copper, but
not to the use of iron; they had gold and silver; and their stonework,
their pottery, weaving, and dyeing were carried to a very high level. In
all these things the American product resembles the old-world product
generally, but always it has characteristics that are distinctive. The
American civilizations had picture-writing of a primitive sort, but it
never developed even to the pitch of the earliest Egyptian
hieroglyphics. In Yucatan only was there a kind of script, the Maya
writing, but it was used simply for keeping a calendar. In Peru the
beginnings of writing were superseded by a curious and complicated
method of keeping records by means of knots tied upon strings of various
colours and shapes. It is said that even laws and orders could be
conveyed by this code. These string bundles were called _quipus_, but
though quipus are still to be found in collections, the art of reading
them is altogether lost. The Chinese histories, Mr. L. Y. Chen informs
us, state that a similar method of record by knots was used in China
before the invention of writing there. The Peruvians also got to making
maps and the use of counting-frames. “But with all this there was no
means of handing on knowledge and experience from one generation to
another, nor was anything done to fix and summarize these intellectual
possessions, which are the basis of literature and science.”[120]