These are facts that the historian of mankind is obliged to note with as
little comment as possible. Private enterprise in Europe in 1919
displayed neither will nor capacity for meeting the crying needs of the
time. So soon as it was released from control, it ran naturally into
speculation, cornering, and luxury production. It followed the line of
maximum profit. It displayed no sense of its own dangers; and it
resisted any attempt to restrain and moderate its profits and make
itself serviceable, even in its own interest. And this went on in the
face of the most striking manifestations of the extreme recalcitrance on
the part of the European masses to the prolonged continuance of the
privations and inconveniences they suffered. In 1913 these masses were
living as they had lived since birth; they were habituated to the life
they led. The masses of 1919, on the other hand, had been uprooted
everywhere, to go into the armies, to go into munition factories, and so
on. They had lost their habits of acquiescence, and they were hardier
and more capable of desperate action. Great multitudes of men had gone
through such brutalizing training as, for instance, bayonet drill; they
had learnt to be ferocious, and to think less either of killing or being
killed. Social unrest had become, therefore, much more dangerous.
Everything seemed to point to a refusal to tolerate the current state of
affairs for many years. Unless the educated and prosperous and
comfortable people of Europe could speedily get their private enterprise
under sufficient restraint to make it work well and rapidly for the
common good, unless they could develop the idea of business as primarily
a form of public service and not primarily a method of profit-making,
unless they could in their own interest achieve a security of peace that
would admit of a cessation not only of war preparation, but of
international commercial warfare, strike and insurrection promised to
follow strike and insurrection up to a complete social and political
collapse. It was not that the masses had or imagined that they had the
plan of a new social, political, and economic system. They had not, and
they did not believe they had. The defects we have pointed out in the
socialist scheme (chapter xxxix, § 5) were no secret from them. It was a
much more dangerous state of affairs than that. It was that they were
becoming so disgusted with the current system, with its silly luxury,
its universal waste, and its general misery, that they did not care what
happened afterwards so long as they could destroy it. It was a return to
a state of mind comparable to that which had rendered possible the
debacle of the Roman Empire.