We have already given an account in chap. xviii. of the peculiarities of
Chinese writing and of the Chinese language. The Japanese writing is
derived from the Chinese, and consists of a more rapidly written system
of forms. A great number of these forms are ideograms taken over from
the Chinese and used exactly as the Chinese ideograms are used, but also
a number of signs are used to express syllables; there is a Japanese
syllabary after the fashion of the Sumerian syllabary we have described
in chap. xviii. The Japanese writing remains a clumsy system, as clumsy
as cuneiform, though not so clumsy as Chinese; and there has been a
movement in Japan to adopt a Western alphabet. Korea long ago went a
step farther and developed a true alphabet from the same Chinese
origins. With these exceptions all the great writing systems now in use
in the world are based on the Mediterranean alphabets, and are beyond
comparison more easily learnt and mastered than the Chinese. This means
that while other peoples learn merely a comparatively simple and
straightforward method of setting down the language with which they are
familiar, the Chinaman has to master a great multitude of complex word
signs and word groups. He must not simply learn the signs, but the
established grouping of those signs to represent various meanings. He
must familiarize himself, therefore, with a number of exemplary
classical works. Consequently in China, while you will find great
numbers of people who know the significance of certain frequent and
familiar characters, you discover only a few whose knowledge is
sufficiently extensive to grasp the meaning of a newspaper paragraph,
and still fewer who can read any subtlety of intention or fine shades of
meaning. In a lesser degree this is true also of Japan. No doubt
European readers, especially of such word-rich languages as English or
Russian, vary greatly among themselves in regard to the extent of books
they can understand and how far they understand them; their power varies
according to their vocabularies; but the corresponding levels of
understanding among the Chinese represent a far greater expenditure of
time and labour upon their attainment. A mandarin’s education in China
is, mainly, learning to read.