Let us turn again now from this intellectual renascence in the cradle of
the ancient civilizations to the affairs of the Western world. We have
described the complete economic, social, and political break up of the
Roman imperial system in the west, the confusion and darkness that
followed in the sixth and seventh centuries, and the struggles of such
men as Cassiodorus to keep alight the flame of human learning amidst
these windy confusions. For a time it would be idle to write of states
and rulers. Smaller or greater adventurers seized a castle or a
countryside and ruled an uncertain area. The British Islands, for
instance, were split up amidst a multitude of rulers; numerous Keltic
chiefs in Ireland and Scotland and Wales and Cornwall fought and
prevailed over and succumbed to each other; the English invaders were
also divided into a number of fluctuating “kingdoms,” Kent, Wessex,
Essex, Sussex, Mercia, Northumbria, and East Anglia, which were
constantly at war with one another. So it was over most of the Western
world. Here a bishop would be the monarch, as Gregory the Great was in
Rome; here a town or a group of towns would be under the rule of the
duke or prince of this or that. Amidst the vast ruins of the city of
Rome half-independent families of quasi-noble adventurers and their
retainers maintained themselves. The Pope kept a sort of general
predominance there, but he was sometimes more than balanced by a “Duke
of Rome.” The great arena of the Colosseum had been made into a
privately-owned castle, and so too had the vast circular tomb of the
Emperor Hadrian; and the adventurers who had possession of these
strongholds and their partisans waylaid each other and fought and
bickered in the ruinous streets of the once imperial city. The tomb of
Hadrian was known after the days of Gregory the Great as the Castle of
St. Angelo, the Castle of the Holy Angel, because when he was crossing
the bridge over the Tiber on his way to St. Peter’s to pray against the
great pestilence which was devastating the city, he had had a vision of
a great angel standing over the dark mass of the mausoleum and sheathing
a sword, and he had known then that his prayers would be answered. This
Castle of St. Angelo played a very important part in Roman affairs
during this age of disorder.