“So the Persians having taken him brought him into the presence of
Cyrus; and he piled up a great pyre and caused Crœsus to go up upon
it bound in fetters, and along with him twice seven sons of Lydians,
whether it was that he meant to dedicate this offering as first-fruits
of his victory to some god, or whether he desired to fulfil a vow, or
else had heard that Crœsus was a god-fearing man, and so caused him
to go up on the pyre because he wished to know if any one of the divine
powers would save him, so that he should not be burnt alive. He, they
say, did this; but to Crœsus as he stood upon the pyre there came,
although he was in such evil case, a memory of the saying of Solon, how
he had said with divine inspiration that no one of the living might be
called happy. And when this thought came into his mind, they say that
he sighed deeply and groaned aloud, having been for long silent, and
three times he uttered the name of Solon. Hearing this, Cyrus bade the
interpreters ask Crœsus who was this person on whom he called; and
they came near and asked. And Crœsus for a time, it is said, kept
silence when he was asked this, but afterwards, being pressed, he said:
‘One whom more than much wealth I should have desired to have speech
with all monarchs.’ Then, since his words were of doubtful import, they
asked again of that which he said; and as they were urgent with him and
gave him no peace, he told how once Solon, an Athenian, had come and
having inspected all his wealth had made light of it, with such and such
words; and how all had turned out for him according as Solon had said,
not speaking at all especially with a view to Crœsus himself, but
with a view to the whole human race, and especially those who seem to
themselves to be happy men. And while Crœsus related these things,
already the pyre was lighted and the edges of it round about were
burning. Then they say that Cyrus, hearing from the interpreters what
Crœsus had said, changed his purpose and considered that he himself
also was but a man, and that he was delivering another man, who had been
not inferior to himself in felicity, alive to the fire; and, moreover,
he feared the requital, and reflected that there was nothing of that
which men possessed which was secure; therefore, they say, he ordered
them to extinguish as quickly as possible the fire that was burning, and
to bring down Crœsus and those who were with him from the pyre; and
they, using endeavours, were not able now to get the mastery of the
flames. Then it is related by the Lydians that Crœsus, having learned
how Cyrus had changed his mind, and seeing that every one was trying to
put out the fire, but that they were no longer able to check it, cried
aloud, entreating Apollo that if any gift had ever been given by him
which was acceptable to the god, he would come to his aid and rescue him
from the evil which was now upon him. So he with tears entreated the
god, and suddenly, they say, after clear sky and calm weather clouds
gathered and a storm burst, and it rained with a very violent shower,
and the pyre was extinguished. Then Cyrus, having perceived that
Crœsus was a lover of the gods and a good man, caused him to be
brought down from the pyre and asked him as follows: ‘Crœsus, tell
me who of all men was it who persuaded thee to march upon my land and so
to become an enemy to me instead of a friend?’ And he said: ‘O king, I
did this to thy felicity and to my own misfortune, and the causer of
this was the god of the Hellenes, who incited me to march with my army.
For no one is so senseless as to choose of his own will war rather than
peace, since in peace the sons bury their fathers, but in war the
fathers bury their sons. But it was pleasing, I suppose, to the divine
powers that these things should come to pass thus.’”