The earlier wars did not involve remote or prolonged campaigns, and they
were waged by levies of the common people. But war brought in a new
source of possessions, plunder, and a new social factor, the captive. In
the earlier, simpler days of war, the captive man was kept only to be
tortured or sacrificed to the victorious god; the captive women and
children were assimilated into the tribe. But later many captives were
spared to be slaves because they had exceptional gifts or peculiar arts.
It would be the kings and captains who would take these slaves at first,
and it would speedily become apparent to them that these men were much
more their own than were the peasant cultivators and common men of their
own race.[149] The slave could be commanded to do all sorts of things
for his master that the quasi-free common man would not do so willingly
because of his attachment to his own patch of cultivation. From a very
early period the artificer was often a household slave, and the
manufacture of trade goods, pottery, textiles, metal ware, and so forth,
such as went on vigorously in the household city of the Minos of
Cnossos, was probably a slave industry from the beginning. Sayce, in his
_Babylonians and Assyrians_,[150] quotes Babylonian agreements for the
teaching of trades to slaves, and dealing with the exploitation of slave
products. Slaves produced slave children, enslavement in discharge of
debts added to the slave population; it is probable that as the cities
grew larger, a larger part of the new population consisted of these
slave artificers and slave servants in the large households. They were
by no means abject slaves; in later Babylon their lives and property
were protected by elaborate laws. Nor were they all outlanders. Parents
might sell their children into slavery, and brothers their orphan
sisters. Free men who had no means of livelihood would even sell
themselves into slavery. And slavery was the fate of the insolvent
debtor. Craft apprenticeship, again, was a sort of fixed-term slavery.
Out of the slave population, by a converse process, arose the freed-man
and freed-woman, who worked for wages and had still more definite
individual rights. Since in Babylon slaves could themselves own
property, many slaves saved up and bought themselves. Probably the town
slave was often better off and practically as free as the cultivator of
the soil, and as the rural population increased, its sons and daughters
came to mix with and swell the growing ranks of artificers, some bound,
some free.