Moreover, there had been considerable changes in the proportions of
class to class. One of the most difficult things for the historian to
trace is the relative amount of the total property of the community held
at any time by any particular class in that community. These things
fluctuate very rapidly. The peasant wars of Europe indicate a phase of
comparatively concentrated property when large masses of people could
feel themselves expropriated and at a common disadvantage, and so take
mass action. This was the time of the rise and prosperity of the Fuggers
and their like, a time of international finance. Then with the vast
importation of silver and gold and commodities into Europe from America,
there seems to have been a restoration of a more diffused state of
wealth. The poor were just as miserable as ever, but there were perhaps
not so many poor relatively, and they were broken up into a variety of
types without any ideas in common. In Great Britain the agricultural
life which had been dislocated by the confiscations of the Reformation
had settled down again into a system of tenant fanning under great
landowners. Side by side with the large estates there was still,
however, much common land for pasturing the beasts of the poorer
villagers, and much land cultivated in strips upon communal lines. The
middling sort of man, and even the poorer sort of man upon the land,
were leading an endurable existence in 1700. The standard of life, the
idea, that is, of what is an endurable existence, was, however, rising
during the opening phase of Grand Monarchy; after a time the process of
the upward concentration of wealth seems to have been resumed, the
larger landowners began to acquire and crowd out the poorer free
cultivators, and the proportion of poor people and of people who felt
they were leading impoverished lives increased again. The bigger men
were unchallenged rulers of Great Britain, and they set themselves to
enact laws, the Enclosure Acts, that practically confiscated the
unenclosed and common lands, mainly for the benefit of the larger
landowners. The smaller men sank to the level of wage workers upon the
land over which they had once possessed rights of cultivation and
pasture.