The three Polos started by way of Palestine and not by the Crimea, as in
the previous expedition. They had with them a gold tablet and other
indications from the Great Khan that must have greatly facilitated their
journey. The Great Khan had asked for some oil from the lamp that burns
in the Holy Sepulchre at Jerusalem; and so thither they first went, and
then by way of Cilicia into Armenia. They went thus far north because
the Sultan of Egypt was raiding the Ilkhan domains at this time. Thence
they came by way of Mesopotamia to Ormuz on the Persian Gulf, as if they
contemplated a sea voyage. At Ormuz they met merchants from India. For
some reason they did not take ship, but instead turned northward through
the Persian deserts, and so by way of Balkh over the Pamir to Kashgar,
and by way of Kotan and the Lob Nor (so following in the footsteps of
Yuan Chwang) into the Hwangho Valley and on to Pekin. Pekin Polo calls
“Cambulac”; Northern China, “Cathay” (= Khitan); and Southern China of
the former Sung dynasty, “Manzi.” At Pekin was the Great Khan, and they
were hospitably entertained. Marco particularly pleased Kublai; he was
young and clever, and it is clear he had mastered the Tartar language
very thoroughly. He was given an official position and sent on several
missions, chiefly in South-west China. The tale he had to tell of vast
stretches of smiling and prosperous country, “all the way excellent
hostelries for travellers,” and “fine vineyards, fields, and gardens,”
of “many abbeys” of Buddhist monks, of manufactures of “cloth of silk
and gold and many fine taffetas,” a “constant succession of cities and
boroughs,” and so on, first roused the incredulity and then fired the
imagination of all Europe. He told of Burmah, and of its great armies
with hundreds of elephants, and how these animals were defeated by the
Mongol bowmen, and also of the Mongol conquest of Pegu. He told of
Japan, and greatly exaggerated the amount of gold in that country. And,
still more wonderful, he told of Christians and Christian rulers in
China, and of a certain “Prester John,” John the Priest, who was the
“king” of a Christian people. Those people he had not seen. Apparently
they were a tribe of Nestorian Tartars in Mongolia. An understandable
excitement probably made Rusticiano over-emphasize what must have seemed
to him the greatest marvel of the whole story, and Prester John became
one of the most stimulating legends of the fourteenth and fifteenth
centuries. It encouraged European enterprise enormously to think that
far away in China was a community of their co-religionists, presumably
ready to welcome and assist them. For three years Marco ruled the city
of Yang-chow as governor, and he probably impressed the Chinese
inhabitants as being very little more of a foreigner than any Tartar
would have been. He may also have been sent on a mission to India.
Chinese records mention a certain Polo attached to the imperial council
in 1277, a very valuable confirmation of the general truth of the Polo
story.