The stories of violence and vanity in his closing years cluster thick
upon his memory. He listened to tittle-tattle about Philotas, the son of
Parmenio, one of his most trusted and faithful generals. Philotas, it
was said, had boasted to some woman he was making love to that Alexander
was a mere boy; that, but for such men as his father and himself, there
would have been no conquest of Persia, and the like. Such assertions had
a certain element of truth in them. The woman was brought to Alexander,
who listened to her treacheries. Presently Philotas was accused of
conspiracy, and, upon very insufficient evidence, tortured and executed.
Then Alexander thought of Parmenio, whose other two sons had died for
him in battle. He sent swift messengers to assassinate the old man
before he could hear of his son’s death! Now Parmenio had been one of
the most trusted of Philip’s generals; it was Parmenio who had led the
Macedonian armies into Asia before the murder of Philip. There can be
little doubt of the substantial truth of this story, nor about the
execution of Callisthenes, the nephew of Aristotle, who refused
Alexander divine honours, and “went about with as much pride as if he
had demolished a tyranny, while the young men followed him as the only
freeman among thousands.” Mixed with such incidents we have the very
illuminating story of the drunken quarrel in which he killed Clitus. The
monarch and his company had been drinking hard, and the drink had made
the talk loud and free. There was much flattery of the “young god,” much
detraction of Philip, at which Alexander had smiled with
satisfaction.[200] Was he not the son of a god? This drunken
self-complacency was more than the honest Macedonians could stand; it
roused Clitus, his foster-brother, to a frenzy. Clitus reproached
Alexander with his Median costume and praised Philip, there was a loud
quarrel, and, to end it, Clitus was hustled out of the room by his
friends. He was, however, in the obstinate phase of drunkenness, and he
returned by another entrance. He was heard outside quoting Euripides “in
a bold and disrespectful tone”: