These lake-village people were considerably more advanced in methods and
knowledge, and probably much later in time than the early Neolithic
people who accumulated the shell mounds, known as kitchen middens, on
the Danish and Scotch coasts. These kitchen midden folk may have been as
early as 10,000 B.C. or earlier; the lake dwellings were probably
occupied continuously from 5000 or 4000 B.C. down almost to historic
times. Those early kitchen-midden people were among the most barbaric of
Neolithic peoples, their stone axes were rough, and they had no
domesticated animal except the dog. The lake-dwellers, on the other
hand, had, in addition to the dog, which was of a medium-sized breed,
oxen, goats, and sheep. Later on, as they were approaching the Bronze
Age, they got swine. The remains of cattle and goats prevail in their
débris, and, having regard to the climate and country about them, it
seems probable that these beasts were sheltered in the buildings upon
the piles in winter, and that fodder was stored for them. Probably the
beasts lived in the same houses with the people, as the men and beasts
do now in Swiss chalets. The people in the houses possibly milked the
cows and goats, and milk perhaps played as important a part in their
economy as it does in that of the mountain Swiss of to-day. But of that
we are not sure at present. Milk is not a natural food for adults; it
must have seemed queer stuff to take at first; and it may have been only
after much breeding that a continuous supply of milk was secured from
cows and goats. Some people think that the use of milk, cheese, butter,
and other milk products came later into human life when men became
nomadic. The writer is, however, disposed to give the Neolithic men
credit for having discovered milking. The milk, if they did use it (and,
no doubt, in that case sour curdled milk also, but not well-made cheese
and butter), they must have kept in earthenware pots, for they had
pottery, though it was roughly hand-made pottery and not the shapely
product of the potter’s wheel. They eked out this food supply by
hunting. They killed and ate red deer and roe deer, bison and wild boar.
And they ate the fox, a rather high-flavoured meat, and not what any one
would eat in a world of plenty. Oddly enough, they do not seem to have
eaten the hare, although it was available as food. They are supposed to
have avoided eating it, as some savages are said to avoid eating it to
this day, because they feared that the flesh of so timid a creature
might make them, by a sort of infection, cowardly.[55]