We have already mentioned (chap, xxxi, § 5) the Persian Mani who was
crucified and flayed in the year 277. His way of representing the
struggle between good and evil was as a struggle between a power of
light which was, as it were, in rebellion against a power of darkness
inherent in the universe. All these profound mysteries are necessarily
represented by symbols and poetic expressions, and the ideas of Mani
still find a response in many intellectual temperaments to-day. One may
hear Manichæan doctrines from many Christian pulpits. But the orthodox
Catholic symbol was a different one. These Manichæan ideas had spread
very widely in Europe, and particularly in Bulgaria and the south of
France. In the south of France the people who held them were called the
Cathars or Albigenses. Their ideas jarred so little with the essentials
of Christianity that they believed themselves to be devout Christians.
As a body they lived lives of conspicuous virtue and purity in a
violent, undisciplined, and vicious age. But they questioned the
doctrinal soundness of Rome and the orthodox interpretation of the
Bible. They thought Jesus was a rebel against the cruelty of the God of
the Old Testament, and not his harmonious son. Closely associated with
the Albigenses were the Waldenses, the followers of a man called Waldo,
who seems to have been quite soundly Catholic in his theology, but
equally offensive to the church because he denounced the riches and
luxury of the clergy. This was enough for the Lateran, and so we have
the spectacle of Innocent III preaching a crusade against these
unfortunate sectaries, and permitting the enlistment of every wandering
scoundrel at loose ends to carry fire and sword and rape and every
conceivable outrage among the most peaceful subjects of the King of
France. The accounts of the cruelties and abominations of this crusade
are far more terrible to read than any account of Christian martyrdoms
by the pagans, and they have the added horror of being indisputably
true.