The chief views that the historian notices are those of the Arians, the
Sabellians, and the Trinitarians. The Arians followed Arius, who taught
that Christ was less than God; the Sabellians taught that he was a mode
or aspect of God; God was Creator, Saviour, and Comforter just as one
man may be father, trustee, and guest; the Trinitarians, of whom
Athanasius was the great leader, taught that the Father, the Son, and
the Holy Ghost were three distinct Persons, but one God. The reader is
referred to the Athanasian Creed[292] for the exact expression of the
latter mystery, and for the alarming consequences to him of any failure
to grasp and believe it. To Gibbon he must go for a derisive statement
of these controversies. The present writer can deal with them neither
with awe nor derision; they seem to him, he must confess, a disastrous
ebullition of the human mind entirely inconsistent with the plain
account of Jesus preserved for us in the gospels. Orthodoxy became a
test not only for Christian office, but for Christian trade and help. A
small point of doctrine might mean affluence or beggary to a man. It is
difficult to read the surviving literature of the time without a strong
sense of the dogmatism, the spites, rivalries, and pedantries of the men
who tore Christianity to pieces for the sake of these theological
refinements. Most of the Trinitarian disputants--for it is chiefly
Trinitarian documents that survive--accuse their antagonists, probably
with truth, of mean and secondary motives, but they do so in a manner
that betrays their own base spirit very clearly. Arius, for example, is
accused of heretical opposition because he was not appointed Bishop of
Alexandria. Riots and excommunications and banishments punctuated these
controversies, and finally came official persecutions. These fine
differences about the constitution of the Deity interwove with politics
and international disputes. Men who quarrelled over business affairs,
wives who wished to annoy their husbands, developed antagonistic views
upon this exalted theme. Most of the barbarian invaders of the empire
were Arians; probably because their simple minds found the Trinitarian
position incomprehensible.