In the case of the Roman Republic, history tells of the first big
community of will in the world’s history, the first free community much
larger than a city, and how it weakened with growth and spent itself
upon success until at last it gave way to a monarchy of the ancient
type, and decayed swiftly into one of the feeblest communities of
servitude that ever collapsed before a handful of invaders. We have
given some attention in this book to the factors in that decay, because
they are of primary importance in human history. One of the most evident
was the want of any wide organization of education to base the ordinary
citizens’ minds upon the idea of service and obligation to the republic,
to keep them _willing_, that is; another was the absence of any medium
of general information to keep their activities in harmony, to enable
them to _will_ as one body. The community of will is limited in size by
the limitations set upon the possibilities of a community of knowledge.
The concentration of property in a few hands and the replacement of free
workers by slaves were rendered possible by the decay of public spirit
and the confusion of the public intelligence that resulted from these
limitations. There was, moreover, no efficient religious idea behind the
Roman state; the dark Etruscan liver-peering cult of Rome was as little
adapted to the political needs of a great community as the very similar
Shamanism of the Mongols. It is in the fact that both Christianity and
Islam, in their distinctive ways, did at least promise to supply, for
the first time in human experience, this patent gap in the Roman
republican system as well as in the nomadic system, to give a common
moral education for a mass of people, and to supply them with a common
history of the past and a common idea of a human purpose and destiny,
that their enormous historical importance lies. Aristotle, as we have
noted, had set a limit to the ideal community of a few thousand
citizens, because he could not conceive how a larger multitude could be
held together by a common idea. He had had no experience of any sort of
education beyond the tutorial methods of his time. Greek education was
almost purely _viva-voce_ education; it could reach therefore only to a
limited aristocracy. Both the Christian church and Islam demonstrated
the unsoundness of Aristotle’s limitation. We may think they did their
task of education in their vast fields of opportunity crudely or badly,
but the point of interest to us is that they did it at all. Both
sustained almost world-wide propagandas of idea and inspiration. Both
relied successfully upon the power of the written word to link great
multitudes of diverse men together in common enterprises. By the
eleventh century, as we have seen, the idea of Christendom had been
imposed upon all the vast warring miscellany of the smashed and
pulverized Western empire, and upon Europe far beyond its limits, as a
uniting and inspiring idea. It had made a shallow but effective
community of will over an unprecedented area and out of an unprecedented
multitude of human beings. Only one other thing at all like this had
ever happened to any great section of mankind before, and that was the
idea of a community of good behaviour that the _literati_ had spread
throughout China.[373]