It was from this Ireland of the darkness that the recalcitrant Ireland
of the twentieth century arose. The Irish Parliament, its fine
literature, its science, all its culture, gravitated naturally enough to
London, because they were inseparably a part of that world. The more
prosperous landlords went to England to live, and had their children
educated there. The increasing facilities of communication enhanced this
tendency and depleted Dublin. The Act of Union (January 1st, 1801) was
the natural coalescence of two entirely kindred systems, of the
Anglo-Irish Parliament with the British Parliament, both oligarchic,
both politically corrupt in the same fashion. There was a vigorous
opposition on the part, not so much of the outer Irish as of Protestants
settled in Ireland, and a futile insurrection under Robert Emmet in
1803. Dublin, which had been a fine Anglo-Irish city in the middle
eighteenth century, was gradually deserted by its intellectual and
political life, and invaded by the outer Irish of Ireland. Its
fashionable life became more and more official, centring upon the Lord
Lieutenant in Dublin Castle; its chief social occasion is now a horse
show. But while the Ireland of Swift and Goldsmith was part and lot with
the England of Pope, Dr. Johnson, and Sir Joshua Reynolds, while there
has never been and is not now any real definable difference except one
of geography between the “governing class” in Ireland and in Britain,
the Irish underworld and the English underworld were essentially
dissimilar. The upward struggle of the English “democracy” to education,
to political recognition, had no Irish counterpart. Britain was
producing a great industrial population, Protestant or sceptical; she
had agricultural labourers indeed, but no peasants. Ireland had become a
land of peasants, blankly ignorant and helplessly priest-ridden. Their
cultivation degenerated more and more into a growing of potatoes and a
feeding of pigs. The people married and bred; except for the consumption
of whisky when it could be got, and a little fighting, family life was
their only amusement. This was the direct result of orthodox Catholic
teaching; the priests were all-powerful with the people and they taught
them nothing; not even washing or drainage; they forbade them to seek
any Protestant learning, they allowed their agricultural science to sink
to mere potato-growing, and they preyed upon their poverty. Here are the
appalling consequences. The population of Ireland