The Reformation according to the common man was very different in spirit
from the Princely Reformation. We have already told something of the
popular attempts at Reformation in Bohemia and Germany. The wide
spiritual upheavals of the time were at once more honest, more confused,
more enduring, and less immediately successful than the reforms of the
princes. Very few religious-spirited men had the daring to break away or
the effrontery to confess that they had broken away from all
authoritative teaching, and that they were now relying entirely upon
their own minds and consciences. That required a very high intellectual
courage. The general drift of the common man in this period in Europe
was to set up his new acquisition, the Bible, as a counter authority to
the church. This was particularly the case with the great leader of
German Protestantism, Martin Luther (1483-1546). All over Germany, and
indeed all over Western Europe, there were now men spelling over the
black-letter pages of the newly translated and printed Bible, over the
Book of Leviticus and the Song of Solomon and the Revelation of St. John
the Divine--strange and perplexing books--quite as much as over the
simple and inspiring record of Jesus in the Gospels. Naturally they
produced strange views and grotesque interpretations. It is surprising
that they were not stranger and grotesquer. But the human reason is an
obstinate thing, and will criticize and select in spite of its own
resolutions. The bulk of these new Bible students took what their
consciences approved from the Bible and ignored its riddles and
contradictions. All over Europe, wherever the new Protestant churches of
the princes were set up, a living and very active residuum of
Protestants remained who declined to have their religion made over for
them in this fashion. These were the Nonconformists, a medley of sects,
having nothing in common but their resistance to authoritative religion,
whether of the Pope or the State.[382] Most but not all of these
Nonconformists held to the Bible as a divinely inspired and
authoritative guide. This was a strategic rather than an abiding
position, and the modern drift of Nonconformity has been onward away
from this original Bibliolatry towards a mitigated and sentimentalized
recognition of the bare teachings of Jesus of Nazareth. Beyond the range
of Nonconformity, beyond the range of professed Christianity at all,
there is also now a great and growing mass of equalitarian belief and
altruistic impulse in the modern civilizations, which certainly owes, as
we have already asserted, its spirit to Christianity, which began to
appear in Europe as the church lost its grip upon the general
mind.[383]