However complicated the origins of currency, its practical effect and
the end it has to serve in the community may be stated roughly in simple
terms. The money a man receives for his work (mental or bodily) or for
relinquishing his property in some consumable good, must ultimately be
able to purchase for him for his use a fairly equivalent amount of
consumable goods. (“Consumable goods” is a phrase we would have
understood in the widest sense to represent even such things as a
journey, a lecture or theatrical entertainment, housing, medical advice,
and so forth.) When everyone in a community is assured of this, and
assured that the money will not deteriorate in purchasing power, then
currency--and the distribution of goods by trade--is in a healthy and
satisfactory state. Then men will work cheerfully, and only then. The
imperative need for that steadfastness and security of currency is the
fixed datum from which the scientific study and control of currency must
begin. But under the most stable conditions there will always be
fluctuations in currency value. The sum total of saleable consumable
goods in the world and in various countries varies from year to year and
from season to season; autumn is probably a time of plenty in comparison
with spring; with an increase the purchasing power of currency will
increase, unless there is also an increase in the amount of currency. On
the other hand, if there is a diminution in the production of consumable
goods or a great and unprofitable destruction of consumable goods, such
as occurs in a war, the share of the total of consumable goods
represented by a sum of money will diminish and prices and wages will
rise. In modern war the explosion of a single big shell, even if it hits
nothing, destroys labour and material roughly equivalent to a
comfortable cottage or a year’s holiday for a man. If the shell hits
anything, then that further destruction has to be added to the
diminution of consumable goods. Every shell that burst in the recent war
diminished by a little fraction the purchasing value of every coin in
the whole world. If there is also an increase of currency during a
period when consumable goods are being used up and not fully
replaced--and the necessities of revolutionary and war-making
governments almost always require this--then the enhancement of prices
and the fall in the value of the currency paid in wages is still
greater. Usually also governments under these stresses borrow money,
that is to say, they issue interest-bearing paper, secured on the
willingness and ability of the general community to endure taxation.
Such operations would be difficult enough if they were carried out
frankly by perfectly honest men, in the full light of publicity and
scientific knowledge. But hitherto this has never been the case; at
every point the clever egotist, the bad rich man, is trying to deflect
things a little to his own advantage. Everywhere too one finds the
stupid egotist ready to take fright and break into panic. Consequently
we presently discover the state encumbered by an excess of currency,
which is in effect a non-interest-paying debt, and also with a great
burthen of interest upon loans. Both credit and currency begin to
fluctuate wildly with the evaporation of public confidence. They are, we
say, demoralized.