[383] “If I were writing a history of democracy,” comments E. B., “I
should deal first with democracy in religion, which is Calvinism,
founded by a great Frenchman at Geneva, and then with democracy in
politics, which is the French Revolution, inaugurated by another great
Frenchman at Geneva, Rousseau. (The parallel of these two is
striking--both typical exponents of the French genius, in its ardent
logic and its apostolic fervour which gives in a burning lava to the
world the findings of its logic.) It is noticeable in England how
democracy in religion (Presbyterianism, which is simply Calvinism, plus
Independency or Congregationalism) leads straight under the Stuarts to
the English democratic ideas of the seventeenth century. I do not think
the democratic element in Protestantism is sufficiently appreciated in
the text. Even Luther, in the early days of 1520, could write _The
Freedom of a Christian Man_ and champion the priesthood of each believer
and his direct access to his Maker. Luther, it is true, changed by 1525,
and became a monarchist, the apostle of a state religion, under a godly
prince who was _summus episcopus_. Anglicanism was from the first a
monarchist religion, under a Henry VIII who was _supremum caput_. But if
Lutheranism became, and Anglicanism was from the first, a religion of
the State, Calvinism was always the religion of resistance to the
State--in Holland and in Scotland most especially. The Reformation thus
produced two opposite effects in politics; so far as it was Lutheran and
Anglican it was monarchist; so far as it was Calvinistic, it was
democratic. It is at first sight curious, but it is really quite
natural, that the Catholics of the counter-reformation should also have
been democratic. The Catholics could not admit the control of the
monarch in the sphere of religion any more than the Calvinist; and here,
as in other things (_e.g_. in the claim to possession of infallible
truth), the Catholic priest and the Calvinistic presbyter were agreed.
Filmer, an exponent of Anglican monarchism, expresses this well when he
says, in speaking of the doctrine of a social contract, that ‘Cardinal
Bellarmine and Calvin both look asquint this way.’ For the doctrine of a
social contract was the democratic doctrine put forward by Catholics and
Calvinists in opposition to the Lutheran and Anglican doctrine of divine
right.”