From this point onward the glory of the Omayyad line decays. The first
tremendous impulse of Islam was now spent. There was no further
expansion and a manifest decline in religious zeal. Islam had made
millions of converts, and had digested those millions very imperfectly.
Cities, nations, whole sects and races, Arab pagans, Jews, Christians,
Manichæans, Zoroastrians, Turanian pagans, had been swallowed up into
this new vast empire of Muhammad’s successors. It has hitherto been the
common characteristic of all the great unifying religious initiators of
the world, the common oversight, that they have accepted the moral and
theological ideals to which the first appeal was made, as though they
were universal ideals. Muhammad’s appeal, for example, was to the
traditional chivalry and underlying monotheistic feelings of the
intelligent Arabs of his time. These things were latent in the mind and
conscience of Mecca and Medina; he did but call them forth. Then, as the
new teaching spread and stereotyped itself, it had to work on a
continually more uncongenial basis, it had to grow in soil that
distorted and perverted it. Its sole textbook was the Koran. To minds
untuned to the melodies of Arabic, this book seemed to be, as it seems
to many European minds to-day, a mixture of fine-spirited rhetoric
with--to put it plainly--formless and unintelligent gabble. Countless
converts missed the real thing in it altogether. To that we must ascribe
the readiness of the Persian and Indian sections of the faith to join
the Shiite schism upon a quarrel that they could at least understand and
feel. And to the same attempt to square the new stuff with old
prepossessions was due such extravagant theology as presently disputed
whether the Koran was and always had been co-existent with God.[328] We
should be stupefied by the preposterousness of this idea if we did not
recognize in it at once the well-meaning attempt of some learned
Christian convert to Islamize his belief that “In the beginning was the
Word, and the Word was with God, and the Word was God.”[329]