“In a style less grave than that of history, I should perhaps compare
the Emperor Alexius to the jackal, who is said to follow the steps and
to devour the leavings of the lion. Whatever had been his fears and
toils in the passage of the First Crusade, they were amply recompensed
by the subsequent benefits which he derived from the exploits of the
Franks. His dexterity and vigilance secured their first conquest of
Nicæa, and from this threatening station the Turks were compelled to
evacuate the neighbourhood of Constantinople. While the Crusaders, with
blind valour, advanced into the midland countries of Asia, the crafty
Greek improved the favourable occasion when the emirs of the sea coast
were recalled to the standard of the Sultan. The Turks were driven from
the isles of Rhodes and Chios; the cities of Ephesus and Smyrna, of
Sardes, Philadelphia, and Laodicea were restored to the empire, which
Alexius enlarged from the Hellespont to the banks of the Mæander and the
rocky shores of Pamphylia. The churches resumed their splendour; the
towns were rebuilt and fortified; and the desert country was peopled
with colonies of Christians, who were gently removed from the more
distant and dangerous frontier. In these paternal cares we may forgive
Alexius, if we forget the deliverance of the Holy Sepulchre; but, by the
Latins, he was stigmatized with the foul reproach of treason and
desertion. They had sworn fidelity and obedience to his throne; but _he_
had promised to assist their enterprise in person, or at least, with his
troops and treasures; his base retreat dissolved their obligations; and
the sword, which had been the instrument of their victory, was the
pledge and title of their just independence. It does not appear that the
emperor attempted to revive his obsolete claims over the kingdom of
Jerusalem, but the borders of Cilicia and Syria were more recent in his
possession and more accessible to his arms. The great army of the
Crusaders was annihilated or dispersed; the principality of Antioch was
left without a head, by the surprise and captivity of Bohemond; his
ransom had oppressed him with a heavy debt; and his Norman followers
were insufficient to repel the hostilities of the Greeks and Turks. In
this distress, Bohemond embraced a magnanimous resolution, of leaving
the defence of Antioch to his kinsman, the faithful Tancred; of arming
the West against the Byzantine Empire, and of executing the design which
he inherited from the lessons and example of his father Guiscard. His
embarkation was clandestine; and if we may credit a tale of the Princess
Anna, he passed the hostile sea closely secreted in a coffin. (Anna
Comnena adds, that to complete the imitation, he was shut up with a dead
cock; and condescends to wonder how the barbarian could endure the
confinement and putrefaction. This absurd tale is unknown to the
Latins.) But his reception in France was dignified by the public
applause and his marriage with the king’s daughter; his return was
glorious, since the bravest spirits of the age enlisted under his
veteran command; and he repassed the Adriatic at the head of five
thousand horse and forty thousand foot, assembled from the most remote
climates of Europe. The strength of Durazzo and prudence of Alexius, the
progress of famine and approach of winter, eluded his ambitious hopes;
and the venal confederates were seduced from his standard. A treaty of
peace suspended the fears of the Greeks.”