And while we have had to tell of something like a complete social
collapse in the west, there were no such equivalent breakdowns in the
east. Towns and cities flourished, the countryside was well cultivated,
trade went on. For many centuries Constantinople was the greatest and
richest city in the world. We will not trouble ourselves here with the
names and follies, the crimes and intrigues, of its tale of emperors. As
with most monarchs of great states, they did not guide their empire;
they were carried by it. We have already dealt at some length with
Constantine the Great (312-337), we have mentioned Theodosius the Great
(379-395), who for a little while reunited the empire, and Justinian I
(527-565).[304] Presently we shall tell something of Heraclius
(610-641). Justinian, like Constantine, may have had Slav blood in his
veins. He was a man of great ambition and great organizing power, and he
had the good fortune to be married to a woman of equal or greater
ability, the Empress Theodora, who had in her youth been an actress of
doubtful reputation. But his ambitious attempts to restore the ancient
greatness of the empire probably overtaxed its resources. As we have
told, he reconquered the African province from the Vandals and most of
Italy from the Goths. He also recovered the South of Spain. He built the
great and beautiful church of Saint Sophia in Constantinople, founded a
university, and codified the law.[305] But against this we must set his
closing of the schools of Athens. Meanwhile a great plague swept the
world, and at his death this renewed and expanded empire of his crumpled
up again like a blown-out bladder. The greater part of his Italian
conquests was lost to the Lombards. Italy was indeed at that time almost
a desert; the Lombard historians assert they came into an empty country.
The Avars and Slavs struck down from the Danube country towards the
Adriatic, Slav populations establishing themselves in what is now
Serbia, Croatia, and Dalmatia, to become the Yugo-Slavs of to-day.
Moreover, a great and exhausting struggle began with the Sassanid Empire
in Persia.