The Museum he set up in Alexandria was in effect the first university in
the world. As its name implies, it was dedicated to the service of the
Muses, which was also the case with the Peripatetic school at Athens. It
was, however, a religious body only in form, in order to meet the legal
difficulties of endowment in a world that had never foreseen such a
thing as a secular intellectual process. It was essentially a college of
learned men engaged chiefly in research and record, but also to a
certain extent in teaching. At the outset, and for two or three
generations, the Museum at Alexandria presented such a scientific
constellation as even Athens at its best could not rival. Particularly
sound and good was the mathematical and geographical work. The names of
Euclid, familiar to every schoolboy, Eratosthenes, who measured the size
of the earth and came within fifty miles of the true diameter,
Apollonius, who wrote on conic sections, stand out. Hipparchus made the
first attempt to catalogue and map the stars with a view to checking any
changes that might be occurring in the heavens. Hero devised the first
steam engine. Archimedes came to Alexandria to study, and remained a
frequent correspondent of the Museum. The medical school of Alexandria
was equally famous. For the first time in the world’s history a standard
of professional knowledge was set up. Herophilus, the greatest of the
Alexandrian anatomists, is said to have conducted vivisections upon
condemned criminals.[204] Other teachers, in opposition to Herophilus,
condemned the study of anatomy and developed the science of drugs. But
this scientific blaze at Alexandria did not endure altogether for more
than a century. The organization of the Museum was not planned to ensure
its mental continuity. It was a “royal” college; its professors and
fellows (as we may call them) were appointed and paid by Pharaoh. “The
republican character of the private corporations called the schools or
academies at Athens was far more stable and independent.”[205] Royal
patronage was all very well so long as Pharaoh was Ptolemy I, or Ptolemy
II, but the strain degenerated, and the long tradition of Egyptian
priestcraft presently swallowed up the Ptolemies--and destroyed the
Aristotelian mentality of the Museum altogether. The Museum had not
existed for a hundred years before its scientific energy was extinct.