We have already described the gatherings of the popular comitia; but
that clumsy assembly in sheep pens does not convey the full extent to
which the gerrymandering of popular representation could be carried in
Rome. Whenever there was a new enfranchisement of citizens in Italy,
there would be the most elaborate trickery and counter-trickery to enrol
the new voters into as few or as many of the thirty old “tribes” as
possible, or to put them into as few as possible new tribes. Since the
vote was taken by tribes, it is obvious that however great the number of
new additions made, if they were all got together into one tribe, their
opinion would only count for one tribal vote, and similarly if they were
crowded into just a few tribes, old or new. On the other hand, if they
were put into too many tribes, their effect in any particular tribe
might be inconsiderable. Here was the sort of work to fascinate every
smart knave in politics. The _comitia tributa_, could be _worked_ at
times so as to vote right counter to the general feeling of the people.
And as we have already noted, the great mass of voters in Italy were
also disenfranchised by distance. About the middle period of the
Carthaginian wars there were upwards of 300,000 Roman citizens; about
100 B.C. there were more than 900,000, but in effect the voting of the
popular assembly was confined to a few score thousand resident in and
near Rome, and mostly men of a base type. And the Roman voters were
“organized” to an extent that makes the Tammany machine of New York seem
artless and honest. They belonged to clubs, _collegia sodalicia_, having
usually some elegant religious pretensions; and the rising politician
working his way to office went first to the usurers and then with the
borrowed money to these clubs. If the outside voters were moved enough
by any question to swarm into the city, it was always possible to put
off the voting by declaring the omens unfavourable. If they came in
unarmed, they could be intimidated; if they brought in arms, then the
cry was raised that there was a plot to overthrow the republic, and a
massacre would be organized.