But we will not go on with the details of this dream. For indeed no
Utopia was ever so impossible as this forecast of a world in which
scarcely anything but very carefully sandbagged and camouflaged G. H. Q.
would be reasonably safe, in which countless bombers would bomb the
belligerent lands incessantly and great armies with lines of caterpillar
transport roll to and fro, churning the fields of the earth into
blood-streaked mud. There is not energy enough and no will whatever left
in the world for such things. Generals who cannot foresee tanks cannot
be expected to foresee or understand world bankruptcy; still less are
they likely to understand the limits imposed upon military operations by
the fluctuating temper of the common man. Apparently these military
authorities of the United Service Institution did not even know that
warfare aims at the production of states of mind in the enemy, and is
sustained by states of mind. The chief neglected factor in the
calculations of Sir Louis is the fact that no people whatever will stand
such warfare as he contemplates, not even the people on the winning
side. For as northern France, south-eastern Britain, and north Italy now
understand, the victor in the “next war” may be bombed and starved
almost as badly as the loser. A phase is possible in which a
war-tormented population may cease to discriminate between military
gentlemen on this side or that, and may be moved to destroy them as the
common enemies of the race. The Great War of 1914-18 was the culmination
of the military energy of the western populations, and they fought and
fought well because they believed they were fighting “the war to end
war.” They were. German imperialism, with its organized grip upon
education and its close alliance with an aggressive commercialism, was
beaten and finished. The militarism and imperialism of Britain and
France and Italy are by comparison feeble, disorganized, and
disorganizing survivals. They are things “left over” by the great war.
They have no persuasive power. They go on--for sheer want of wits to
leave off. No European Government will ever get the same proportion of
its people into the ranks and into its munition works again as the
governments of 1914-18 did. Our world is very weak and feeble still
(1920), but its war fever is over. Its temperature is, if anything,
sub-normal. It is doubtful if it will take the fever again for a long
time. The alterations in the conditions of warfare are already much
profounder than such authorities as Sir Louis Jackson suspect.[527]