This was a very fundamental struggle in British affairs. On the one hand
were the Liberal majority of the people of Great Britain honestly and
wisely anxious to put this Irish affair upon a new and more hopeful
footing, and, if possible, to change the vindictive animosity of the
Irish into friendship; on the other were all the factors of this new
British Imperialism resolved at any cost and in spite of every electoral
verdict, legally, if possible, but if not, illegally, to maintain their
ascendancy over the affairs of the English, Scotch, and Irish and all
the rest of the empire alike. It was, under new names, the age-long
internal struggle of the English community; that same conflict of a free
and liberal-spirited commonalty against powerful “big men” and big
adventures and authoritative persons which we have already dealt with in
our account of the liberation of America. Ireland was merely a
battleground as America had been. In India, in Ireland, in England, the
governing class and their associated adventurers were all of one mind;
but the Irish people, thanks to their religious difference, had little
sense of solidarity with the English. Yet such Irish statesmen as
Redmond, the leader of the Irish party in the House of Commons,
transcended this national narrowness for a time, and gave a generous
response to English good intentions. Slowly yet steadily the barrier of
the House of Lords was broken down, and a third Irish Home Rule Bill was
brought in by Mr. Asquith, the Prime Minister, in 1912. Throughout 1913
and the early part of 1914 this bill was fought and re-fought through
Parliament. At first it gave Home Rule to all Ireland; but an Amending
Act, excluding Ulster on certain conditions, was promised. This struggle
lasted right up to the outbreak of the Great War. The royal assent was
given to this bill after the actual outbreak of war, and also to a bill
suspending the coming into force of Irish Home Rule until after the end
of the war. These bills were put upon the Statute Book.