The earliest known reptiles were beasts with great bellies and not very
powerful legs, very like their kindred amphibia, wallowing as the
crocodile wallows to this day; but in the Mesozoic they soon began to
stand up and go stoutly on all fours, and several great sections of them
began to balance themselves on tail and hind legs, rather as the
kangaroos do now, in order to release the fore limbs for grasping food.
The bones of one notable division of reptiles which retained a
quadrupedal habit, a division of which many remains have been found in
South African and Russian Early Mesozoic deposits, display a number of
characters which approach those of the mammalian skeleton, and because
of this resemblance to the mammals (beasts) this division is called the
_Theriomorpha_ (beastlike). Another division was the crocodile branch,
and another developed towards the tortoises and turtles. The
_Plesiosaurs_ and _Ichthyosaurs_ were two groups which have left no
living representatives; they were huge reptiles returning to a
whale-like life in the sea. _Pliosaurus_, one of the largest
plesiosaurs, measured thirty feet from snout to tail tip--of which half
was neck. The _Mosasaurs_ were a third group of great porpoise-like
marine lizards. But the largest and most diversified group of these
Mesozoic reptiles was the group we have spoken of as kangaroo-like, the
_Dinosaurs_, many of which attained enormous proportions. In bigness
these greater _Dinosaurs_ have never been exceeded, although the sea can
still show in the whales creatures as great. Some of these, and the
largest among them, were herbivorous animals; they browsed on the rushy
vegetation and among the ferns and bushes, or they stood up and grasped
trees with their fore legs while they devoured the foliage. Among the
browsers, for example, were the _Diplodocus carnegii_, which measured
eighty=four feet in length, and the _Atlantosaurus_. The
_Gigantosaurus_, disinterred by a German expedition in 1912 from rocks
in East Africa, was still more colossal. It measured well over a hundred
feet! These greater monsters had legs, and they are usually figured as
standing up on them; but it is very doubtful if they could have
supported their weight in this way, out of water. Buoyed up by water or
mud, they may have got along. Another noteworthy type we have figured is
the _Triceratops_. There were also a number of great flesh-eaters who
preyed upon these herbivores. Of these, _Tyrannosaurus_ seems almost the
last word in “frightfulness” among living things. Some species of this
genus measured forty feet from snout to tail. Apparently it carried this
vast body kangaroo fashion on its tail and hind legs. Probably it reared
itself up. Some authorities even suppose that it leapt through the air.
If so, it possessed muscles of a quite miraculous quality. A leaping
elephant would be a far less astounding idea. Much more probably it
waded half submerged in pursuit of the herbivorous river saurians.