They began an inquiry, and they arrived at no solutions. We cannot
pretend to-day that we have arrived at solutions to most of the
questions they asked. The mind of the Hebrews, as we have already shown,
awoke suddenly to the endless miseries and disorders of life, saw that
these miseries and disorders were largely due to the lawless acts of
men, and concluded that salvation could come only through subduing
ourselves to the service of the one God who rules heaven and earth. The
Greek, rising to the same perception, was not prepared with the same
idea of a patriarchal deity; he lived in a world in which there was not
God but the gods; if perhaps he felt that the gods themselves were
limited, then he thought of Fate behind them, cold and impersonal. So he
put his problem in the form of an enquiry as to what was right living,
without any definite correlation of the right-living man with the will
of God.... To us, looking at the matter from a standpoint purely
historical, the common problem can now be presented in a form that, for
the purposes of history, covers both the Hebrew and Greek way of putting
it. We have seen our kind rising out of the unconsciousness of animals
to a continuing racial self-consciousness, realizing the unhappiness of
its wild diversity of aims, realizing the inevitable tragedy of
individual self-seeking, and feeling its way blindly towards some
linking and subordinating idea to save it from the pains and accidents
of mere individuality. The gods, the god-king, the idea of the tribe,
the idea of the city; here are ideas that have claimed and held for a
time the devotion of men, ideas in which they have a little lost their
individual selfishness and escaped to the realization of a more enduring
life. Yet, as our wars and disasters prove, none of these greater ideas
have yet been great enough. The gods have failed to protect, the tribe
has proved itself vile and cruel, the city ostracized one’s best and
truest friends, the god-king made a beast of himself....