And the grotesque thing about the story is that Robespierre was
indubitably honest. He was far more honest than any of the group of men
who succeeded him. He was inspired by a consuming passion for a new
order of human life. So far as he could contrive it, the Committee of
Public Safety, the emergency government of twelve which had now thrust
aside the Convention, _constructed_. The scale on which it sought to
construct was stupendous. All the intricate problems with which we still
struggle to-day were met by swift and shallow solutions. Attempts were
made to equalize property. “Opulence,” said St. Just, “is infamous.” The
property of the rich was taxed or confiscated in order that it should be
divided among the poor. Every man was to have a secure house, a living,
a wife and children. The labourer was worthy of his hire, but not
entitled to an advantage. There was an attempt to abolish _profit_
altogether, the rude incentive of most human commerce since the
beginning of society. Profit is the economic riddle that still puzzles
us to-day. There were harsh laws against “profiteering” in France in
1793--England in 1919 found it necessary to make quite similar laws. And
the Jacobin government not only replanned--in eloquent outline--the
economic, but also the social system. Divorce was made as easy as
marriage; the distinction of legitimate and illegitimate children was
abolished.... A new calendar was devised, with new names for the months,
a week of ten days, and the like--that has long since been swept away;
but also the clumsy coinage and the tangled weights and measures of old
France gave place to the simple and lucid decimal system that still
endures.... There was a proposal from one extremist group to abolish God
among other institutions altogether, and to substitute the worship of
Reason. There was, indeed, a Feast of Reason in the cathedral of
Notre-Dame, with a pretty actress as the goddess of Reason. But against
this Robespierre set his face; he was no atheist. “Atheism,” he said,
“is aristocratic. The idea of a Supreme Being who watches over oppressed
innocence and punishes triumphant crime is essentially the idea of the
people.”