Of course this decision did not flash out complete and finished from the
American mind at the beginning of these troubles. In America in the
eighteenth century, just as in England in the seventeenth, there was an
entire willingness, indeed a desire on the part of ordinary men, to
leave foreign affairs in the hands of the king and his ministers. But
there was an equally strong desire on the part of ordinary men to be
neither taxed nor interfered with in their ordinary pursuits. These are
incompatible wishes. Common men cannot shirk world politics and at the
same time enjoy private freedom; but it has taken them countless
generations to learn this. The first impulse in the American revolt
against the government in Great Britain was therefore simply a
resentment against the taxation and interference that followed
necessarily from “foreign policy” without any clear recognition of what
was involved in that objection. It was only when the revolt was
consummated that the people of the American colonies recognized at all
clearly that they had repudiated the Great Power view of life. The
sentence in which that repudiation was expressed was Washington’s
injunction to “avoid entangling alliances.” From his time until the year
1917 the united colonies of Great Britain in North America, liberated
and independent as the United States of America, stood apart altogether
from the blood-stained intrigues and conflicts of the European foreign
offices. Soon after (1810-1823) they were able to extend their principle
of detachment to the rest of the continent, and to make all the New
World “out of bounds” for the scheming expansionists of the old. When at
length, in 1917, they were obliged to re-enter the arena of world
politics, it was to bring the new spirit and new aims their aloofness
had enabled them to develop into the tangle of international
relationships. They were not, however, the first to stand aloof. Since
the treaty of Westphalia (1648), the confederated states of Switzerland,
in their mountain fastnesses, had sustained their right to exclusion
from the schemes of kings and empires.