Let us, at the risk of a slight repetition, be perfectly clear upon one
point. The _Iliad_ does not give us the primitive neolithic life of that
Aryan region of origin; it gives us that life already well on the move
towards a new state of affairs. The primitive neolithic way of living,
with its tame and domesticated animals, its pottery and cooking, and its
patches of rude cultivation, we have sketched in Chapter XI. We have
already discussed in § 4 of Chapter XIII the probability of a
widespread _heliolithic_ culture, a sort of sub-civilization, very like
the Polynesian and Indonesian life of a hundred years ago, an
elaboration of the earlier Neolithic stage. Between 15,000 and 6000 B.C.
the neolithic way of living had spread with the forests and abundant
vegetation of the Pluvial Period, over the greater part of the old
world, from the Niger to the Hwang-ho and from Ireland to the south of
India. Now, as the climate of great portions of the earth was swinging
towards drier and more open conditions again, the primitive neolithic
life was developing along two divergent directions. One was leading to a
more wandering life, towards at last a constantly migratory life between
summer and winter pasture, which is called NOMADISM; the other, in
certain sunlit river valleys, was towards a water-treasuring life of
irrigation, in which men gathered into the first towns and made the
first CIVILIZATION. The nature and development of civilization we shall
consider more fully in the next chapter, but here we have to note that
the Greeks, as the _Iliad_ presents them, are neither simple neolithic
nomads, innocent of civilization, nor are they civilized men. They are
primitive nomads in an excited state, because they have just come upon
civilization, and regard it as an opportunity for war and loot.[96] So
far they are exceptional and not representative. But our interest in
them in this chapter is not in their distinctively Greek and predatory
aspect, but in what they reveal of the ordinary northward life from
which they are coming.