The Polos had taken about three and a half years to get to China. They
stayed there upwards of sixteen. Then they began to feel homesick. They
were the protégés of Kublai, and possibly they felt that his favours
roused a certain envy that might have disagreeable results after his
death. They sought his permission to return. For a time he refused it,
and then an opportunity occurred. Argon, the Ilkhan monarch of Persia,
the grandson of Hulagu, Kublai’s brother, had lost his Mongol wife, and
on her deathbed had promised not to wed any other woman but a Mongol of
her own tribe. He sent ambassadors to Pekin, and a suitable princess was
selected, a girl of seventeen. To spare her the fatigues of the caravan
route, it was decided to send her by sea with a suitable escort. The
“Barons” in charge of her asked for the company of the Polos because
these latter were experienced travellers and sage men, and the Polos
snatched at this opportunity of getting homeward. The expedition sailed
from some port on the east of South China; they stayed long in Sumatra
and South India, and they reached Persia after a voyage of two years.
They delivered the young lady safely to Argon’s successor--for Argon was
dead--and she married Argon’s son. The Polos then went by Tabriz to
Trebizond, sailed to Constantinople, and got back to Venice about 1295.
It is related that the returned travellers, dressed in Tartar garb, were
refused admission to their own house. It was some time before they could
establish their identity. Many people who admitted that, were still
inclined to look askance at them as shabby wanderers; and, in order to
dispel such doubts, they gave a great feast, and when it was at its
height they had their old padded suits brought to them, dismissed the
servants, and then ripped open these garments, whereupon an incredible
display of “rubies, sapphires, carbuncles, emeralds, and diamonds”
poured out before the dazzled company. Even after this, Marco’s accounts
of the size and population of China were received with much furtive
mockery. The wits nicknamed him _Il Milione_, because he was always
talking of millions of people and millions of ducats.