Here, put into quasi-eloquent phrasing, and with a jest adapted to the
mental habits of the audience, we have the common-sense view of the
ordinary prosperous man not only of Great Britain, but of America or
France or Italy or Germany. In quality and tone it is a fair sample of
British political thought in 1919. The prevailing economic system has
made us what we are, is the underlying idea; and we do not want any
process of social destruction to precede a renascence of society, we do
not want to experiment with the fundamentals of our social order. Let us
accept that. Adaptation, Mr. Lloyd George admitted, there had to be. Now
this occasion of his speaking was a year and a month after the
Armistice, and for all that period private enterprise had been failing
to do all that Mr. Lloyd George was so cheerfully promising it would do.
The community was in urgent need of houses. Throughout the war there had
been a cessation not only of building, but of repairs. The shortage of
houses in the last months of 1919 amounted to scores of thousands in
Britain alone.[513] Multitudes of people were living in a state of
exasperating congestion, and the most shameless profiteering in
apartments and houses was going on. It was a difficult, but not an
impossible situation. Given the same enthusiasm and energy and
self-sacrifice that had tided over the monstrous crisis of 1916, the far
easier task of providing a million houses could have been performed in a
year or so. But there had been corners in building materials, transport
was in a disordered state, and it did not _pay_ private enterprise to
build houses at any rents within the means of the people who needed
them. Private enterprise, therefore, so far from bothering about the
public need of housing, did nothing but corner and speculate in rents
and sub-letting. It now demanded grants in aid from the State--in order
to build at a profit. And there was a great crowding and dislocation of
goods at the dépôts because there was insufficient road transport. There
was an urgent want of cheap automobiles to move about goods and workers.
But private enterprise in the automobile industry found it far more
profitable to produce splendid and costly cars for those whom the war
had made rich. The munition factories built with public money could have
been converted very readily into factories for the mass production of
cheap automobiles, but private enterprise had insisted upon these
factories being sold by the State, and would neither meet the public
need itself nor let the State do so. So, too, with the world, in the
direst discomfort for need of shipping, private enterprise insisted upon
the shutting down of the newly constructed State shipyards. Currency was
dislocated everywhere, but private enterprise was busy buying and
selling francs or marks and intensifying the trouble. While Mr. George
was making the very characteristic speech we have quoted, the discontent
of the common man was gathering everywhere, and little or nothing was
being done to satisfy his needs. It was becoming very evident that
unless there was to be some profound change in the spirit of business,
under an unrestrained private enterprise system there was little or no
hope, in Europe at any rate, of decent housing, clothing, or education
for the workers for two or three generations.