The extent of the British colonies in America in the early half of the
eighteenth century is shown in the accompanying map.[420] The darker
shading represents the districts settled in 1700, the lighter the growth
of the settlements up to 1760. It will be seen that the colonies were a
mere fringe of population along the coast, spreading gradually inland
and finding in the Alleghany and Blue Mountains a very serious barrier.
Among the oldest of these settlements was the colony of Virginia, the
name of which commemorates Queen Elizabeth, the Virgin Queen of England.
The first expedition to found a colony in Virginia was made by Sir
Walter Raleigh in 1584, but there was no permanent settlement at that
time; and the real beginnings of Virginia date from the foundation of
the Virginia Company in 1606 in the reign of James I (1603-25). The
story of John Smith and the early founders of Virginia, and of how the
Indian “princess” Pocahontas married one of his gentlemen, is an
English classic.[421] In growing tobacco the Virginians found the
beginning of prosperity. At the same time that the Virginian Company was
founded, the Plymouth Company obtained a charter for the settlement of
the country to the north of Long Island Sound, to which the English laid
claim. But it was only in 1620 that the northern region began to be
settled, and that under fresh charters. The settlers of the northern
region (New England), which became Connecticut, New Hampshire, Rhode
Island, and Massachusetts, were men of a different stamp to the Virginia
people. They were Protestants discontented with the Anglican Church
compromise, and republican-spirited men hopeless of resistance to the
Grand Monarchy of James I and Charles I. Their pioneer ship was the
_Mayflower_, which founded New Plymouth in 1620. The dominant northern
colony was Massachusetts. Differences in religious method and in ideas
of toleration led to the separation of the three other Puritan colonies
from Massachusetts. It illustrates the scale upon which things were done
in those days that the whole state of New Hampshire was claimed as
belonging to a certain Captain John Mason, and that he offered to sell
it to the king (King Charles II in 1671) in exchange for the right to
import 300 tons of French wine free of duty--an offer which was refused.
The present state of Maine was bought by Massachusetts from its alleged
owner for twelve hundred and fifty pounds.