It would be difficult to find a human being less likely to arouse
affection. One reads in vain through the monstrous accumulations of
Napoleonic literature for a single record of self-forgetfulness.
Laughter is one great difference between man and the lower animals, one
method of our brotherhood, and there is no evidence that Napoleon ever
laughed. Nor can we imagine another of the most beautiful of human
expressions upon the face of this saturnine egotist, that expression of
disinterested interest that one sees in the face of an artist or artisan
“lost,” as we say, in his work. Out of his portraits he looks at us with
a thin scorn upon his lips, the scorn of the criminal who believes that
he can certainly cheat such fools as we are, and withal with a certain
uneasiness in his eyes. That uneasiness haunts all his portraits. Are
we really convinced he is quite right? Are his laurels straight? He had
a vast contempt for man in general and men in particular, a contempt
that took him at last to St. Helena, that same contempt that fills our
jails with forgers, poisoners, and the like victims of self-conceit.
There is no proof that this unbrotherly, unhumorous egotist was ever
sincerely loved by any human being. The Empress Josephine was unfaithful
to him as he to her. His young Austrian wife would not accompany him to
Elba. A certain Polish countess followed him thither, but not, it would
seem, for love, but on account of the son she had borne him. She wanted
settlements. She stayed only two days with him. He had never even a dog
to love him. He estranged most of his colleagues and fellow generals. He
had no familiar friend. No one who knew him felt safe with him. In his
intimacy, his unflinching self-concentration must have been a terrible
bore. His personal habits were unpleasant; the moodiness of bad health
came to him early. True it is that his soldiers, who, save for a few
rare melodramatic encounters, saw nothing of him, idolized their “Little
Corporal.” But it was not him they idolized, but a carefully fostered
legend of an incredibly clever, recklessly brave little man, a little
pet of a man, who was devoted to France and them.