The Catholic Church provided what the Roman Republic had lacked, a
system of popular teaching, a number of universities and methods of
intellectual inter-communication. By this achievement it opened the way
to the new possibilities of human government that now become apparent in
this _Outline_, possibilities that are still being apprehended and
worked out in the world in which we are living. Hitherto the government
of states had been either authoritative, under some uncriticized and
unchallenged combination of priest and monarch, or it had been a
democracy, uneducated and uninformed, degenerating with any considerable
increase of size, as Rome and Athens did, into a mere rule by mob and
politician. But by the thirteenth century the first intimations had
already dawned of an ideal of government which is still making its way
to realization, the modern ideal, the ideal of a world-wide _educational
government_, in which the ordinary man is neither the slave of an
absolute monarch nor of a demagogue-ruled state, but an informed,
inspired, and consulted part of his community. It is upon the word
educational that stress must be laid, and upon the idea that information
must precede consultation. It is in the practical realization of this
idea[374] that education is a collective function and not a private
affair that one essential distinction of the “modern state” from any of
its precursors lies. The modern citizen, men are coming to realize, must
be informed first and then consulted. Before he can vote he must hear
the evidence; before he can decide he must know. It is not by setting up
polling booths, but by setting up schools and making literature and
knowledge and news universally accessible that the way is opened from
servitude and confusion to that willingly co-operative state which is
the modern ideal. Votes in themselves are worthless things. Men had
votes in Italy in the time of the Gracchi. Their votes did not help
them. Until a man has education, a vote is a useless and dangerous thing
for him to possess. The ideal community towards which we move is not a
community of will simply; it is _a community of knowledge and will_,
replacing _a community of faith and obedience_. Education is the adapter
which will make the nomadic spirit of freedom and self-reliance
compatible with the co-operations and wealth and security of
civilization.