But it is not only in these deficiencies of news and of education and of
the expedient of representative government that this political system of
Rome differed from our own. True, it was far more like a modern
civilized state than any other state we have considered hitherto, but in
some matters it was strangely primordial and “sub-civilized.” Every now
and then the reader of Roman history, reading it in terms of debates
and measures, policies and campaigns, capital and labour, comes upon
something that gives him much the same shock he would feel if he went
down to an unknown caller in his house and extended his hand to meet the
misshapen hairy paw of _Homo Neanderthalensis_ and looked up to see a
chinless, bestial face. We have noted the occurrence of human sacrifice
in the third century B.C., and much that we learn of the religion of
republican Rome carries us far back beyond the days of decent gods, to
the age of shamanism and magic. We talk of a legislative gathering, and
the mind flies to Westminster; but how should we feel if we went to see
the beginning of a session of the House of Lords, and discovered the
Lord Chancellor, with bloody fingers, portentously fiddling about among
the entrails of a newly killed sheep? The mind would recoil from
Westminster to the customs of Benin. And the slavery of Rome was a
savage slavery, altogether viler than the slavery of Babylon. We have
had a glimpse of the virtuous Cato among his slaves in the second
century B.C. Moreover, in the third century B.C., when King Asoka was
ruling India in light and gentleness, the Romans were reviving an
Etruscan sport, the setting on of slaves to fight for their lives. One
is reminded of West Africa again in the origin of this amusement; it
grew out of the prehistoric custom of a massacre of captives at the
burial of a chief. There was a religious touch about this sport, the
slaves with hooks, who dragged the dead bodies out of the arena, wore
masks to represent the infernal ferry-man-god, Charon. In 264 B.C., the
very year in which Asoka began to reign and the First Punic War began,
the first recorded gladiatorial combat took place in the forum at Rome,
to celebrate the funeral of a member of the old Roman family of Brutus.
This was a modest display of three couples, but soon gladiators were
fighting by the hundred. The taste for these combats grew rapidly, and
the wars supplied an abundance of captives. The old Roman moralists, who
were so severe upon kissing and women’s ornaments and Greek philosophy,
had nothing but good to say for this new development. So long as pain
was inflicted, Roman morality, it would seem, was satisfied.