The events of August 1914 seem to have taken President Wilson, like the
rest of his fellow-countrymen, by surprise. We find him cabling an offer
of his services as a mediator on August 3rd. Then, for a time, he and
America watched the conflict. At first neither the American people nor
their President seem to have had a very clear or profound understanding
of that long-gathered catastrophe. Their tradition for a century had
been to disregard the problems of the Old World, and it was not to be
lightly changed. The imperialistic arrogance of the German Court and the
stupid inclination of the German military authorities towards
melodramatic “frightfulness,” their invasion of Belgium, their cruelties
there, their use of poison gas, and the nuisance of their submarine
campaign created a deepening hostility to Germany in the States as the
war proceeded; but the tradition of political abstinence and the
deep-rooted persuasion that America possessed a political morality
altogether superior to European conflicts restrained the President from
active intervention. He adopted a lofty tone. He professed to be unable
to judge the causes and justice of the Great War. It was largely his
high pacific attitude that secured his re-election as President for a
second term. But the world is not to be mended by merely regarding
evil-doers with an expression of rather undiscriminating disapproval. By
the end of 1916 the Germans had been encouraged to believe that under no
circumstances whatever would the United States fight, and in 1917 they
began their unrestricted submarine warfare and the sinking of American
ships without notice. President Wilson and the American people were
dragged into the war by this supreme folly. And also they were dragged
into a reluctant attempt to define their relations to Old-World politics
in some other terms than those of mere aloofness. Their thoughts and
temper changed very rapidly. They came into the war side by side with
the Allies, but not in any pact with the Allies. They came into the
war, in the name of their own modern civilization, to punish and end an
intolerable political and military situation.