The story of the various state constitutions, and of the constitution of
the United States as a whole, is a very intricate one, and we can only
deal with it here in the broadest way. The most noteworthy point in a
modern view is the disregard of women as citizens. The American
community was a simple, largely agricultural community, and most women
were married; it seemed natural that they should be represented by
their men folk. But New Jersey admitted a few women to vote on a
property qualification. Another point of great interest is the almost
universal decision to have two governing assemblies, confirming or
checking each other, on the model of the Lords and Commons of Britain.
Only Pennsylvania had a single representative chamber, and that was felt
to be a very dangerous and ultra-democratic state of affairs. Apart from
the argument that legislation should be slow as well as sure, it is
difficult to establish any necessity for this “bi-cameral” arrangement.
It seems to have been a fashion with constitution planners in the
eighteenth century rather than a reasonable imperative. The British
division was an old one; the Lords, the original parliament, was an
assembly of “notables,” the leading men of the kingdom; the House of
Commons came in as a new factor, as the elected spokesmen of the
burghers and the small landed men. It was a little too hastily assumed
in the eighteenth century that the commonalty would be given to wild
impulses and would need checking; opinion was for democracy, but for
democracy with powerful brakes always on, whether it was going up hill
or down. About all the upper houses there was therefore a flavour of
selectness; they were elected on a more limited franchise. This idea of
making an upper chamber which shall be a stronghold for the substantial
man does not appeal to modern thinkers so strongly as it did to the men
of the eighteenth century, but the bi-cameral idea in another form still
has its advocates. They suggest that a community may with advantage
consider its affairs from two points of view--through the eyes of a body
elected to represent trades, industries, professions, public services,
and the like, a body representing _function_, and through the eyes of a
second body elected by localities to represent _communities_. For the
members of the former a man would vote by his calling, for the latter by
his district of residence. They point out that the British House of
Lords is in effect a body representing function, in which the land, the
law, and the church are no doubt disproportionately represented, but in
which industrialism, finance, the great public services, art, science,
and medicine, also find places; and that the British House of Commons is
purely geographical in its reference. It has even been suggested in
Britain that there should be “labour peers,” selected from among the
leaders of the great industrial trade unions. But these are speculations
beyond our present scope.