The first thing that will strike the student is the intermittence of the
efforts of the church to establish the world City of God. The policy of
the church was not whole-heartedly and continuously set upon that end.
It was only now and then that some fine personality or some group of
fine personalities dominated it in that direction. The kingdom of God
that Jesus of Nazareth had preached was overlaid, as we have explained,
almost from the beginning by the doctrines and ceremonial traditions of
an earlier age, and of an intellectually inferior type. Christianity
almost from its commencement ceased to be purely prophetic and
creative. It entangled itself with archaic traditions of human
sacrifice, with Mithraic blood-cleansing, with priestcraft as ancient as
human society, and with elaborate doctrines about the structure of the
divinity. The gory forefinger of the Etruscan pontifex maximus
emphasized the teachings of Jesus of Nazareth; the mental complexity of
the Alexandrian Greek entangled them. In the inevitable jangle of these
incompatibles the church had become dogmatic. In despair of other
solutions to its intellectual discords it had resorted to arbitrary
authority. Its priests and bishops were more and more men moulded to
creeds and dogmas and set procedures; by the time they became cardinals
or popes they were usually oldish men, habituated to a politic struggle
for immediate ends and no longer capable of world-wide views. They no
longer wanted to see the Kingdom of God established in the hearts of
men--they had forgotten about that; they wanted to see the power of the
church, which was their own power, dominating men. They were prepared to
bargain even with the hates and fears and lusts in men’s hearts to
ensure that power. And it was just because many of them probably doubted
secretly of the entire soundness of their vast and elaborate doctrinal
fabric, that they would brook no discussion of it. They were intolerant
of questions or dissent, not because they were sure of their faith, but
because they were not. They wanted conformity for reasons of policy. By
the thirteenth century the church was evidently already morbidly anxious
about the gnawing doubts that might presently lay the whole structure of
its pretensions in ruins. It had no serenity of soul. It was hunting
everywhere for heretics as timid old ladies are said to look under beds
and in cupboards for burglars before retiring for the night.