Whatever the true particulars of the Hebrew invasion of Canaan may be,
there can be no doubt that the country they invaded had changed very
greatly since the days of the legendary promise, made centuries before,
to Abraham. Then it seems to have been largely a Semitic land, with many
prosperous trading cities. But great waves of strange peoples had washed
along this coast. We have already told how the dark Iberian or
Mediterranean peoples of Italy and Greece, the peoples of that Ægean
civilization which culminated at Cnossos, were being assailed by the
southward movement of Aryan-speaking races, such as the Italians and
Greeks, and how Cnossos was sacked about 1400 B.C., and destroyed
altogether about 1000 B.C. It is now evident that the people of these
Ægean seaports were crossing the sea in search of securer land nests.
They invaded the Egyptian delta and the African coast to the west, they
formed alliances with the Hittites and other Aryan or Aryanized races.
This happened after the time of Rameses II, in the time of Rameses III.
Egyptian monuments record great sea fights, and also a march of these
people along the coast of Palestine towards Egypt. Their transport was
in the ox-carts characteristic of the Aryan tribes, and it is clear that
these Cretans were acting in alliance with some early Aryan invaders. No
connected narrative of these conflicts that went on between 1300 B.C.
and 1000 B.C. has yet been made out, but it is evident from the Bible
narrative, that when the Hebrews under Joshua pursued their slow
subjugation of the promised land, they came against a new people, the
Philistines, unknown to Abraham,[160] who were settling along the coast
in a series of cities of which Gaza, Gath, Ashdod, Ascalon, and Joppa
became the chief, who were really, like the Hebrews, newcomers, and
probably chiefly these Cretans from the sea and from the north. The
invasion, therefore, that began as an attack upon the Canaanites,
speedily became a long and not very successful struggle for the coveted
and promised land with these much more formidable newcomers, the
Philistines.